<B>Galactic Empire<B>

For thousands of years, the Old Republic ruled the galaxy, attempting to bring together hundreds of star systems under a democratic rule. Unfortunately, the massive Republic became bloated and corrupt over time, leading to discontent and suspicion among its subjects. Unable to maintain control in the galaxy, the Republic found itself at odds with the massive Trade Federation and other groups. Capitalizing on this discord and conflict, Emperor Palpatine rose to power. He took complete control of the government and instituted the so-called New Order, under the pretense of ending the Old Republic's corruption. However, his true agenda focused on total domination of the galaxy. Under Palpatine's rule, the Old Republic was transformed into the Empire, a tyrannical and oppressive government that attempted to enforce order and loyalty through force and fear. Alien races were eradicated or enslaved, entire industries and star systems were nationalized, and terror became a way of life. Slavery was rampant throughout the Empire, and social injustice flourished. Even the Jedi Knights, the last beacon of light in a rapidly darkening galaxy, were pursued and murdered during this dark time. 

To further solidify his position, Palpatine surrounded himself with powerful minions, including the Dark Lord of the Sith, Darth Vader. Eventually, Palpatine even abolished the Imperial Senate, allowing his loyal Moffs to rule portions of his domain as regional governors. Imperial stormtroopers, anonymous soldiers totally loyal to the Emperor, became his shock troops and enforcers on rebellious worlds. Entire systems were frightened into compliance by the massive Star Destroyers, Super Star Destroyers, and orbital battle stations produced by Imperial forces. Most terrifying were the Death Stars, mobile superweapons capable of destroying entire planets.

The Empire began to falter at the Battle of Yavin, when the Alliance forces managed to destroy the first Death Star. Imperial forces enjoyed a brief revenge at the Battle of Hoth, but the combined might of the Rebels brought an end to Palpatine and his government at the Battle of Endor.

Unfortunately, small remnants of the Empire remained scattered throughout the stars. Five years after the Battle of Endor, Grand Admiral Thrawn gathered these forces for an assault on the New Republic. He failed, but a year later, the reborn Emperor threatened galactic peace. Again, the villain was defeated, but the last factions of the Empire remain a constant danger in the age of the New Republic.
