<B>Gungans<B>

The original inhabitants of Naboo, the Gungans are a secretive species found in the thick swamps of their homeworld. An amphibious species with flexible, cartilaginous skeletons, Gungans are generally adept warriors and skilled artisans. They place great emphasis on personal responsibility, loyalty, and courage. 

Gungans have several distinct races. Boss Nass, for example, is an Ankura Gungan, while Jar Jar Binks is an Otolla Gungan. Long before the Battle of Naboo, the rare and ancient Ankuran lineage allied with the Otollans, who had constructed Otoh Gunga. Although the Ankura Gungans, such as Boss Nass, have unique features, most Gungans are tall and lanky. They have long, muscular tongues, partially retractable eyestalks, and four-fingered hands. Their large, strong teeth are designed for crushing tough shellfish, which form a staple of the Gungan diet. Two long earlobes, known as "haillu," are used for displays of aggression, friendship, and fear. The amphibious Gungans have nostrils that seal when they enter the water and nictating membranes covering their eyes. They also boast compound lungs, allowing them to breathe both air and water, along with well-padded kneecaps and powerful calves and legs for increased swimming speed. However, because they are so well-adapted to their watery environment, their skin dries easily in hot and arid climes. A Gungan's skeleton is composed of resilient hard cartilage, which is far more flexible than bone and allows for a wide range of physical movements. Standard family units consist of a mother, father, and several children, which hatch from eggs.

Gungan settlements can be found throughout the Naboo swamps, although many are constructed underwater in large lakes or bayous. Outside of the sprawling Otoh Gunga, Gungans live in a variety of settlements, all united by treaties and agreements. Because of their long isolation, they are suspicious of the Naboo, who have a much different culture. Although traders on the fringe of Gungan society interact with the Naboo, many Gungans have never encountered humans. 

The Gungans worship a pantheon of deities, many of which preside over nature. According to Gungan mythology, these gods live in Ossorus, a beautiful underwater city protected by enchanted sando aqua monsters and giant Gungan warriors astride their loyal kaadu. The principal Gungan deity is Oma-Oma, who is revered in legends as the creator of all life on Naboo.
 
Often considered primitive by outsiders, the Gungans have actually achieved a level of technology that far outstrips many other cultures. Gungan technology is founded on the use of organic materials and they "grow" many of their vehicles, weapons, tools, and even structures. Almost everything the Gungans manufacture is hand-crafted to some extent, so that no two bongos look alike.

It is believed that the Gungans first mobilized for war when threatened by the semi-intelligent bursas, monstrous creatures that attacked Gungan settlements on a regular basis, long before the Naboo arrived. The Gungans assembled a "grand army" to meet this threat, eventually driving the bursas into extinction. Later wars were fought between various Gungan tribes led by power-hungry warlords. The most notorious Gungan warlord was Rogoe, who was ultimately defeated by Gallo. With the defeat of Rogoe, Gallo was able to unite all of the Gungan tribes, becoming the first true "Boss."  

Because the Naboo are entirely peaceful, the Gungans now have no real enemies. However, they maintain a large army for protection against large predators and out of tradition. The army utilizes several weapons based on the strange, Gungan energy balls. The energy balls, which are composed of electrified goo encased in an organic membrane, can be launched from Gungan catapults, atlatls, and cestas.

The Gungan Grand Army is the species' primary fighting force. Composed of soldiers from all of the Gungan settlements on Naboo, the Grand Army can only be rallied by the reigning Boss. In battle, several well-trained generals command their own groups of soldiers.

The majority of the Gungan Grand Army's troops are militiagungs, or part-time soldiers. They are relatively inexperienced, but fight with conviction and courage. Because the Grand Army is only loosely organized, the militiagungs supply their own gear and clothing. They are trained to use cestas and atlatls to hurl energy balls at the enemy, and they can defend themselves with personal shields. The cavalry units sit astride trained kaadu. On the battlefield and during maneuvers, the Grand Army's generals use horns, whistles, and gestures to convey orders and commands. Although certainly assembled to fight, most of the Grand Army's fantastic technology revolves around defending the troops. The army utilizes large shield generators, mounted on fambaas, which combine to protect several legions from blaster fire and heavy artillery.

The Gungan Grand Army had not been called to battle for almost 100 years  when the Trade Federation decided to invade Naboo. After forming an alliance with Queen Amidala, Boss Nass agreed to organize the army to help the humans battle the droid forces. However, the conflict posed a major threat to the Gungans: When Queen Amidala warned Boss Nass that many Gungans could die during the battle against the Trade Federation, she was not underestimating the Gungan Grand Army. Rather, the Queen realized that the Gungans would need to place themselves in harm's way in order to create a convincing diversion. With its advanced technology, expendable droid troops, and staggering firepower, the Trade Federation should have overwhelmed the Gungan diversionary force on an open battlefield. That the Gungans were able to resist capture for quite some time is a testament to their prowess.

As many Gungan generals are quick to point out, the Battle of Naboo is not typical of Gungan tactics. Very few Gungan commanders would have attacked the Trade Federation forces head-on. In fact, before Queen Amidala arrived to plead for a Naboo-Gungan alliance, leaders like General Ceel  and Captain Tarpals were already planning retribution for the Trade Federation's attack on Otoh Gunga. According to their schemes, the Gungans would start a campaign of guerrilla warfare, launching hit-and-run strikes on Trade Federation forces and then vanishing into the swamps. These plans were scuttled when Boss Nass agreed to provide the Queen with a significant diversion. 

In order to attract the Trade Federation's attention, Nass called upon all available members of the Gungan Grand Army. Two thousand soldiers came from every Gungan village and city, with only a few militiagungs remaining behind to protect Gungan territory should the Queen's plan fail. Nass also rolled out heavy Gungan catapults, which he hoped would stall approaching Trade Federation forces, and authorized the deployment of the large Gungan shield generators. With the Grand Gungan Army assembled, Boss Nass ordered a steady march toward Theed.

General Ceel planned to position much of the army atop Shaak Ridge , a row of hills south of Theed and north of the Gallo Mountains. From this tactical high ground, Ceel hoped to decimate enemy vehicles with the army's catapults and take out advance troops using squads of trained atlatl and cesta snipers. Unfortunately, the Trade Federation reacted more quickly to the approaching army than the Gungans had anticipated. When the Gungan army entered the valley of the Great Grass Plains, Ceel's scouts spotted a mile-long line of Trade Federation AATs advancing over the hills. The general ordered an early halt. Although remaining in the valley meant that the catapults would have reduced effectiveness, Ceel knew that the Gungans' proximity to the swamps would at least allow for a quick retreat .

In fact, the Trade Federation had planned to pin the Gungans in the valley. Led by OOM-9, the droid army moved quickly from Theed with the express purpose of capturing Shaak Ridge. Once AATs and support MTTs secured the Ridge, the main body of the army prepared to descend into the Great Grass Plains valley. Meanwhile, additional Trade Federation forces attempted to flank the Gungans from the east and west. OOM-9 calculated that the flanking maneuvers would wipe out the Gungans. Fortunately, the pirate Nym and the mercenary Vana Sage routed one flanking group, while a unit of RSF resistance soldiers under the leadership of Lieutenant Gavyn Sykes destroyed the other. 

Once the Trade Federation army neared, the Gungans made every effort to keep the attackers at bay. At General Ceel's command, Captain Tarpals ordered the activation of the Gungan energy shields, which protected the Grand Army from AAT attacks. When it became obvious that the AATs could not penetrate the shields, OOM-9 pulled the tanks out of catapult range and deployed his foot soldiers. Arranged into units of fifty-six, the battle droids emerged from the MTTs and advanced on the shields. Behind the battle droids, AATs, droidekas, and reserve transports crept closer.

The moment the droids passed through the shield bubble, General Ceel launched a counterattack. Using cestas and atlatls, the Gungans disabled wave after wave of battle droids. Unfortunately, the Trade Federation forces concentrated their fire on the shield generators, eventually destroying the Gungan equipment and disabling the shields. OOM-9 pushed his AATs forward to finish the Gungan Grand Army.

While catapults slowed the AATs, the militiagungs clashed with the battle droids in close-quarters combat. Wielding their cestas as staffs and their atlatls as clubs, the Gungans clobbered dozens of droids. But General Ceel quickly realized that the battle had been lost. The advancing AATs would soon bear down on the Gungans, and the dangerous droidekas had already claimed many lives. Ceel reluctantly ordered a full retreat. Gungan cavalry mounted on kaadu rescued the wounded, while the most courageous Gungans stood their ground to provide others time to escape. Amid the chaos, the Gungans managed to destroy a few additional AATs, but these victories came too late.

OOM-9 assumed that his flanking forces would stop any retreat, but these smaller armies never arrived and over half of the Gungan Grand Army managed to reach the swamps. Battle droids and droidekas surrounded the remaining Gungans, including General Ceel, Captain Tarpals, and General Binks. By this point, the Grand Army's command structure had completely collapsed. While some Gungans realized that surrender was their only option, others braced themselves for a final fight. In the end, neither would be necessary: Just as the Trade Federation closed around the last of the Gungans, and PK units scoured the battlefield to recover blaster rifles and droid parts, Anakin Skywalker destroyed the Droid Control Ship. Without the ship's signal, OOM-9 and the rest of the battle droid army became inert.

Although Boss Nass and General Ceel would not call the Great Grass Plains Battle a stirring victory, all Gungans are proud of the Army's efforts on the battlefield. Five hundred and forty-three Gungans  lost their lives, but the "distraction" ultimately led to the liberation of Naboo.

Since the Battle of Naboo, the Gungans have become a much more open society. They now interact with the Naboo and are even beginning to become involved in matters outside of their homeworld. Under Boss Nass' leadership, the Gungans have also reached the stars and colonized the Naboo moon of Ohma-D'un. 
