<B>The Rebel Alliance<B>

Founded in the early days of Emperor Palpatine's rule, the Rebel Alliance (more properly known as the Alliance to Restore the Republic) was a small band of idealistic and heroic soldiers who joined together to oppose the Empire's tyranny and ultimately bring peace and freedom to the galaxy. 

The resistance movement against the Empire can trace its roots to the Imperial Senate, where a handful of politicians began plotting in secret to topple Palpatine's rule. Eventually, Palpatine exposed these "rebels" and launched a campaign of terror against them. Many dissidents were arrested or murdered, but Senators Mon Mothma and Garm Bel Iblis, both influential and vocal opponents of the Emperor's "New Order," managed to escape. They disappeared into hiding, only resurfacing briefly to meet with Senator Bail Organa on Corellia. At the clandestine meeting, the trio agreed that only an armed insurrection could stop Palpatine. Soon after, Mothma drafted the Declaration to Restore the Republic, which officially founded the Alliance.

Garm Bel Iblis and Mon Mothma began actively recruiting individuals, planets, and even entire systems for the Rebellion. The Rebels were joined by hundreds of pilots, soldiers, technicians, and officers who wished to see the Empire fall. Meanwhile, Bail Organa and his daughter, Princess Leia Organa, covertly aided the Alliance while maintaining their positions within the Senate. Princess Leia eventually secured the plans to the Death Star, a dangerous superweapon capable of vaporizing an entire planet. Darth Vader, the Emperor's Sith apprentice, pursued and captured Leia, but the princess had already set events in motion that would ensure the Death Star plans reached the Rebel Alliance.

Charged with locating and crushing the Rebels, Vader interrogated Princess Leia, to no avail. Grand Moff Tarkin, the mastermind behind the Death Star, then threatened to destroy Leia's homeworld of Alderaan unless she revealed the location of the Alliance's secret base. Princess Leia seemingly relented, but Tarkin unleashed the Death Star anyway in order to test the battle station's superlaser and engender fear in all who would oppose the Empire. Billions died with Alderaan, including Bail Organa. This proved a serious setback to the Alliance, as Organa was instrumental in mediating disagreements between the militant Garm Bel Iblis and more subtle Mon Mothma. After Bail Organa's death, a rift divided the two remaining leaders and Bel Iblis soon abandoned the Alliance. In hindsight, however, the destruction of Alderaan may have also been the Empire's greatest mistake for it galvanized the Rebels; previously unaligned systems, now horrified at the Empire's wanton evil, flocked to join the Alliance.
 
The first major conflict between the Alliance and Imperial forces occurred at the Battle of Yavin.  During the clash, Rebel pilot Luke Skywalker succeeded in destroying the Death Star, killing Grand Moff Tarkin and many other Imperial leaders in the process. The Empire would have its revenge three years later at the Battle of Hoth, when a contingent of Imperial forces led by Darth Vader, General Veers, and Admiral Piett invaded the ice planet Hoth and overtook the Alliance's secret Echo Base. Numerous Alliance soldiers and pilots lost their lives during the clash, but the bulk of the Alliance personnel managed to escape.

A year after the Alliance's defeat on Hoth, the Alliance organized a massive offensive in order to attack the Empire's new Death Star. As the Alliance fleet massed near Sullust, a small strike team led by General Han Solo descended to the forest moon of Endor to destroy the second Death Star's shield generator. Although it was soon discovered that the Death Star attack was part of an elaborate plan by the Emperor to ambush the Rebels, the timely intervention of Endor's Ewoks and brilliant leadership ensured an Alliance victory. Palpatine perished aboard the second Death Star and his death crippled the Empire. The Rebel Alliance quickly evolved into the New Republic, the galaxy's current ruling body.

During the height of the Galactic Civil War, the Rebel Alliance was composed of several informal divisions that included pilots, technicians, and others who aided the cause. Perhaps no other group sacrificed more for the Alliance than its highly-trained infantry, who fought bravely against impossible odds and in every conceivable terrain. Throughout the Civil War, the Alliance ground troops were called upon to defend their fellow Rebels with only outdated artillery and a handful of well-used BlasTech DH-17 blasters. Yet the Rebel infantry units managed to strike major blows against the well-armed Imperial troops during both the Battle of Hoth and the Battle of Endor.

The soldiers assigned to the Rebel infantry served a variety of functions during the Galactic Civil War. First and foremost, they were stationed at every Rebel base as a last line of protection against invading Imperials. On Hoth, for example, they established defensive trenches equipped with Golan Arms DF.9 anti-infantry batteries and Atgar 1.4 FD P-Tower antivehicle artillery units to stall an onslaught of AT-ATs and other Imperial forces. Rebel infantry members also served aboard some Rebel starships to protect important crew members. In some instances, they were assigned patrol, scout, and sentry duties. The most skilled Rebel troops became elite commandos. Under the leadership of General Crix Madine, these commandos attacked sensitive Imperial installations to further the Alliance's cause.
