<B>The Trade Federation<B>

Founded in 350 BBY, the Trade Federation was originally intended to represent merchants and traders throughout the galaxy. However, over time, it became one of the most powerful forces in the galaxy and a dangerous threat to peace and freedom.

Composed of officials from numerous systems, the Trade Federation was always considered greedy and immoral. Using its ever-increasing wealth, the organization focused on seizing major trade routes, knowing that ownership of these spacelanes gave the Trade Federation tremendous political and economic power. By 40 BBY, the Trade Federation effectively controlled every known Old Republic trade route and hundreds of dependent systems. 

In 32 BBY, Senator Palpatine of Naboo began a campaign to diminish the Trade Federation's power. At his urging, the Galactic Senate passed Resolution BR-0371, a seemingly innocuous law that imposed a tariff on all major hyperspace trading routes throughout the Outer and Mid Rims. The resolution was a resounding success because all income from the taxation of the so-called "Free Trade Zones" would be used to pay off the corrupt Old Republic's growing debts. But because the Trade Federation dominated the Free Trade Zones, the corporation was the hardest hit by the new legislation. In the months after the resolution's passage, the Trade Federation's profits decreased dramatically.

The Trade Federation responded immediately to the threat of BR-0371. While the Trade Federation Senator Lott Dod argued vehemently against taxation, the corporation's Executive Board began planning a bold counterstrike. Under the leadership of Viceroy Nute Gunray and his lieutenant Rune Haako, the Trade Federation began constructing a massive secret army. Striking deals with Baktoid Armor Workshop, Haor Chall Engineering, and even the Colicoid Creation Nest, the Trade Federation stocked its cargo vessels with powerful battle tanks, deadly droid starfighters, hordes of battle droids, and menacing droidekas. After testing this army on Lok  and other Outer Rim worlds, the Trade Federation prepared for war.

Six months after the passage of BR-0371, the Trade Federation struck at Naboo, Senator Palpatine's homeworld. On Gunray's orders, a fleet of Trade Federation battleships created a blockade around the peaceful world to prevent the import and export of goods. The blockade lasted several weeks and the Naboo's plight became desperate as necessary supplies dwindled. When the Senate still refused to overturn BR-0371, the Trade Federation finally unleashed its secret army and invaded Naboo. Gunray planned to capture the capital city of Theed and force Queen Amidala to sign a treaty granting the Trade Federation ownership of the planet.

Gunray's plan fell apart when the Jedi Knights intervened in the crisis and rescued Amidala. Soon after, the Battle of Naboo erupted, pitting the Trade Federation against the combined might of the Gungan Grand Army and the Naboo Royal Security Forces. While the Gungans distracted the Trade Federation Army, the Queen and her loyal RSF soldiers recaptured Theed. In the chaos, Naboo's Bravo Flight managed to launch an attack on the Trade Federation's vital Droid Control Ship. Anakin Skywalker destroyed the DCS, rendering the Trade Federation's army harmless. Nute Gunray, the overseer of the invasion, was taken into custody, but avoided any serious punishment and soon returned to his prominent role within the organization.

In the years following the Battle of Naboo, the Trade Federation remained a formidable power in the galaxy. Although most of its initial army had been dismantled, the Trade Federation quickly formed new alliances and began rebuilding its military might. At one point, the Trade Federation even formed an elite assassination corps in a failed attempt to exact revenge on the Jedi. In 29 BBY, the Old Republic ordered the Trade Federation to disband its military, but the corporation never fully complied with this directive and maintained a secret army until the rise of the Empire.
