<B>Wookiees<B> 

One of the most respected - and feared - species in the galaxy, Wookiees are towering, fur-covered humanoids native to Kashyyyk. Well-known for their strength and bestial fits of rage, Wookiees are also intelligent, loyal, and trusting. Among the species, bravery and honor are considered paramount. 

Kashyyyk, the Wookiee homeworld, is a lush planet covered in trees. The Wookiees occupy the upper reaches of these vast forests, building their homes high atop the branches of towering wroshyr trees. Most Wookiee cities consist of hundreds of huts connected by wooden platforms, bridges, and ropes. However, while Wookiees may appear primitive, they are actually quite comfortable with technology and can easily learn to pilot starships, repair machines, and wield advanced weaponry.

An average Wookiee grows to more than two meters tall and lives several times the lifetime of a human. Aside from their great strength and keen senses, they possess regenerative powers and can recover from serious wounds within days. They also have retractable claws, although these are used only for climbing trees and are never exposed during combat.

Wookiees speak Shyriiwook, a language consisting of grunts, growls, roars, hoots, and screeches. They can understand other languages, but have limited vocal capability and can only speak their own tongue.

The Wookiee species is psychologically stable and has a deep connection to nature. They love their homeworld and have a deep affinity for animals, plants, and other components of the natural world. Wookiees can also be strongly attuned to the Force.

Wookiees place great value on morality, courage, compassion, and loyalty. Very few Wookiees willingly betray their friends or families, although Vargi, Chewbacca's brother-in-law, once aided a group of slavers trying to enslave the denizens of Kashyyyk. Typical of their beliefs is the Wookiee life debt, an oath of fealty extended to anyone who saves the life of a Wookiee. When Chewbacca was rescued from slavers by Han Solo, he extended this oath to his savior and has risked his own life countless times to protect his friend. Finally, Wookiees feel that they are honored by their own deeds, and thus they do not care for medals or other material symbols of bravery or achievement. 

Although not necessarily warlike, Wookiees can be fierce warriors and deadly opponents, especially when angered or threatened. Kashyyyk does not have a standing army, but Wookiees will rally to protect one another, and families often join forces to repel various threats, including Trandoshan slavers. Legendary are the stories of the Wookiee berserkers, who are capable of single-handedly defeating a legion of Imperial stomtroopers or a cadre of highly-paid mercenaries. While Wookiees are capable of producing and using and wide range of weapons, they generally prefer to carry hand-crafted bowcasters or ryyk blades into battle. 

Unfortunately, the Wookiees' fabled strength became a commodity during the Galactic Civil War. The Empire, hoping to use the Wookiees for slave labor, tried to imprison the entire planet. Working with Tradoshan slavers, the Empire captured thousands of Wookiees. Those Wookiees who escaped the Imperial slave pens managed to form a resistance movement and launched several effective counter attacks, ensuring that the Empire never took complete control of the planet.

Throughout the Galactic Civil War, Wookiee innovation and desperation led the species to invent several new weapons of war to combat the Imperial threat. As with many other aspects of their technology, the Wookiees combined materials from their natural surroundings with advanced technology to produce a number of effective "deterrents," including catapults and battering rams. Mounted troops, skilled assault soldiers, and the brave Wookiee berserkers  continually attacked Imperial installations on Kashyyyk, chased away slavers, and fought valiantly to free their imprisoned brethren. 

When the Rebel Alliance finally defeated the Empire, Kashyyyk, long a member world of the Old Republic, became an important addition to the New Republic.
