<B>Boss Nass<B>
 
Boss Nass, the leader of the Gungan High Council, sometimes called the Rep Council, actually traces his lineage to the rare and refined Ankura Gungans.  These Gungans are differentiated by their hooded eyes, broad, wide heads, and  green skin-a stark contrast with the orange skin of the more common Otolla Gungans.  The Ankura are an ancient race, separate and distant from other Gungans until the founding of Otoh Gunga.  The new city brought all the Gungans together in a more or less unified community, under the leadership of the High Council.  The Ankura have long maintained a strong presence on the Council, despite being a relatively small percentage of the population.

Little is known about Boss Nass’ history, other than legend and hearsay.  A popular story concerns the early leadership abilities demonstrated when young Nass was merely a tadpole. Evidently, not only was he first to sprout legs in his collective pool, but he seemed to organize the other tadpoles and help them develop, roughly according to age.  When he left the pool, another tadpole assumed the role of leader and began assisting other newborn Gungans.

Boss Nass presides over the Board Room at the center of the city, where he and the Council rule on all sorts of matters-from banishment to granting audiences with outlanders.  Boss Nass was visited once by two Jedi Knights who found their way to Otoh Gunga, accompanied by an outcast Gungan named Jar Jar Binks.  In typical fashion, Boss Nass chose to dispense with the Jedi rather than risk becoming involved in matters best left to the Naboo.  It was Boss Nass’ opinion that Gungans should keep to Gungan business, and “leave da Naboo to da Naboo.”

This governing philosophy ultimately proved to be faulty, as the Trade Federation invaded Naboo.  Nass assumed that the droid armies would concern themselves only with the surface-dwellers, but the Trade Federation eventually began hunting down his people as well, even attacking Otoh Gunga itself.  Fleeing to the Sacred Place, Boss Nass began to consider his options for a counter-attack.  Unfortunately, without the help of the historically-snobby Naboo, he could do little to strike at the Trade Federation leadership.  When Queen Amidala herself sought him out and begged for help, he couldn’t have been more pleased.  Not only did their new partnership enable an effective counter-strike, but to Boss Nass, it signaled a whole new era in Gungan-Naboo relations.  He had been able to achieve what countless of his predecessors could not: global unity and ultimately, peace.
