<B>Chewbacca<B>
 
Born some two hundred years before the Battle of Yavin, Chewbacca is likely one of the oldest heroes of the New Republic, next to the ancient Yoda.  Chewbacca lived on the planet Kashyyyk (also his birthplace) for the first fifty years of his life, learning the ways of his society, proving his worth to the tribe, and watching and learning from his father Attitchitcuk, a wise leader in their clan.  At the age of fifty years, Chewbacca made the decision to venture out into the galaxy for an extended period of isolated exploration and travel. 

The Wookiee term for this is roughly translated as "The Rising Path." They believe that younger Wookiees must experience a time of unsupervised adventure and danger before their blood mellows, and they can return to the clan free from feelings of aggression, ready to serve their villages. Given the reputed quick tempers of the Wookiees, this is a wise policy, born not only of their religions and philosophies, but of a natural concern for having too many brash young Wookiees cooped up together in a small village.  Chewbacca felt it was his time to break free from clan life and discover his own adventure-a feeling likely compounded by the burden of having to stand in Attitchitcuk's long shadow for so long.

Chewbacca journeyed far across the galaxy, wandering from adventure to adventure, sometimes settling briefly to experience a world or culture, sometimes staying only a few days.  As a Wookiee, he found himself a conspicuous target for those wishing to prove their strength or courage, and he adopted the fearsome bandolier and bowcaster combination as a visual warning to those who wished to test him.  His friends found Chewbacca to be loyal and kind, strong and mechanically-inclined, although not fond of losing at games of chance and skill.

The Empire, recognizing that Wookiee strength could be used to build the Imperial war machine, joined forces with Trandoshan slavers to capture and enslave a great many Wookiees. Despite his best efforts, Chewbacca was eventually captured and interred in a labor camp. 

But salvation came in the form of a young Imperial named Han Solo, who freed Chewbacca when he witnessed a superior officer savagely beating the Wookiee. 

This act of defiance cost Solo his career in the Imperial Navy, an obligation he was actually relieved to leave behind. The Wookiee swore a life-debt to the somewhat-sheepish Solo, and the pair set off on a series of adventures that would establish them as two of the greatest smugglers in the galaxy-and lifelong friends.
