<B>Darth Vader<B>

The history of the Sith Lord Darth Vader truly begins with the fall of a man named Anakin Skywalker, once the most promising young Jedi in the galaxy.  As a young boy, the Force-sensitive Skywalker was discovered by Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn on the remote planet of Tatooine.  The Jedi believed the young boy to be 'The Chosen One' and presented him to the Jedi Council for training, but Yoda and others were concerned that Anakin would prove dangerous.  Qui-Gon was slain, but Jinn's own pupil, Obi-Wan Kenobi, vowed to take the boy as his Padawan learner, despite the Council's reservations.

Anakin grew in power, but felt frustrated by Kenobi's instruction, and was tempted by the dark side. He succumbed to its evil power and was consumed by the persona of Darth Vader, Lord of the Sith.  He ceased to be Anakin Skywalker, and became a monster of darkness and evil.  As Lord Vader, he helped exterminate the Jedi and ensure the total domination of the galaxy by his Master, the Emperor Palpatine.  In classic Sith fashion, the Emperor was served by his dark apprentice, and Vader become his Master's enforcer throughout the Empire.

Feared and hated by the Imperial elite, Lord Vader felt no compunction about destroying officers and soldiers he saw as incompetent or disloyal.  His reign of terror nevertheless motivated the Imperial Navy to pursue the Rebellion with a renewed vigor.  

The cunning tactics and merciless strategies of Darth Vader were instrumental in the Imperial campaign to take control of the galaxy.  The Dark Lord often acted as general in local actions, heading up ground charges and air assaults himself.  His skill in his customized TIE Avenger was unparalleled and his mere presence in battle often caused opposing forces to flee in terror.  With the Imperial Navy, Lord Vader led several missions against pirates and secessionists, in addition to his relentless hunt for Rebel traitors. 

After the Death Star plans were stolen, Vader pursued a senator from Alderaan, Princess Leia Organa, and intercepted her vessel over Tatooine.  He transferred her to the Death Star for further questioning, but his plans were interrupted by the arrival of a small band of Rebel rescuers, including his old mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi.  The Dark Lord sensed the presence of the Jedi and sought him out.  They dueled and Vader destroyed the old Jedi.  He was puzzled to see that Kenobi left no body, his physical being somehow disintegrating at the moment of impact.  Vader had little time to meditate on this, however, as soon after he found himself battling a Rebel starfighter attack on the massive Death Star.  One X-wing in particular caught his interest, for it was piloted by someone unusually strong in the Force.  Vader had no way of knowing this young Rebel was Luke Skywalker, his son.

In addition to his well-documented battle against the Rebellion, Lord Vader also contended with conspiracies against him from the Black Sun, led by Prince Xizor.  The foolish gangster attempted to curry favor with the Emperor by politically jousting with Darth Vader, an unsuccessful plan that led to the destruction and dissolution of Black Sun.  Xizor made the mistake of targeting Vader's son for death, and thus earned the full ire of both Vader and the Rebel Alliance.

Darth Vader attempted to turn Skywalker to the dark side in an encounter at Bespin, but the young Jedi hurled himself into an exhaust tube rather than join his father.  He survived the fall and was rescued by his friends.  Luke returned sometime later, after completing his Jedi training and confronted his father about his chosen path of evil.  Vader believed the Emperor's hold over him too strong to break, but when Palpatine attempted to kill young Skywalker, Vader snapped to life.  His feelings for his son were stronger than the Emperor's power; the strength and light of the Force in his son triggered a resurgence of goodness in Vader and he seized his master and cast him into the second Death Star's reactor core.

Redeemed, the man named Darth Vader ceased to exist, and Anakin Skywalker returned to the world.  But his time would be short.  The mechanized body that supported Vader was damaged and beginning to fail.  Father and son reconciled, and Anakin, having discovered the existence of his daughter, passed on a 'goodbye' to Leia, and died in Luke's arms.  
