<B>Princess Leia Organa<B>

Leia Organa grew up as a princess, raised by Bail Organa, the Viceroy and First Chairman of the planet Alderaan.  She was smart and determined, even from an early age, and her adopted father foresaw that he would not be able to delay her entry into galactic politics for long.  He was correct, and the princess became the youngest Imperial Senator ever, at age eighteen.   Leia's experience in the Senate only solidified her opposition to the draconian tactics of the increasingly powerful Emperor Palpatine.  Soon she became secretly involved in the Rebel Alliance.   Bail Organa, though proud of Leia's bravery, had hoped to spare her the danger of being a Rebel agent.  Ultimately, her loyalty to the resistance movement saved her life.

When Bail Organa discovered the existence of a new Imperial battle station, the Death Star, he realized the fledgling Alliance needed leadership.... and quickly.  Bail Organa knew of a powerful ally he could potentially call on, a Jedi Knight long in hiding.  But he couldn't risk the knowledge falling into the wrong hands, and so he turned to Leia-the only person he could trust completely.

She set off in her consular ship, the Tantive IV, on a mission to deliver the stolen Death Star plans to Rebel leaders and recruit the Jedi known as Obi-Wan Kenobi to their cause.  On the way, her ship was intercepted by a massive Star Destroyer and captured.  Luckily, ever-resourceful Leia hid the information in an astromech and allowed herself to be captured while it escaped.

The young woman was questioned and tortured, but refused to reveal the location of the hidden Rebel base.  Ironically, her primary tormentor was Darth Vader, who would later be revealed as Anakin Skywalker, her true father.  The brave Leia survived the torture, and was brought before Grand Moff Tarkin.  The Moff threatened her home planet with utter annihilation and Leia risked everything in a desperate gamble.  She lied.  Tarkin believed her, but ordered the destruction of Alderaan anyway.  Leia took no satisfaction in her ruse, and was crushed to see all she loved and cared for in the galaxy reduced to space debris.

Ironically, Leia's mission for her Rebel Alliance had placed her on a mission out of harm's way when her home planet was destroyed.  

Ultimately, Leia was rescued by Luke Skywalker, and rejoined the Rebellion.  Skywalker's insight into the Force revealed Leia to be his sister, and over time her latent Force powers were developed by the young Jedi.  Together with Han Solo, the trio embarked on years of adventure and ceaseless battles to protect the freedom of the New Republic's citizens. 
