<B>OOM-9<B>

OOM-9 was created, like all other battle droids, for the sole purpose of war and destruction.  His masters were the Neimoidian Viceroy Nute Gunray, Lott Dodd, and Rune Haako. OOM-9 began his existence as a standard battle droid, but was specially-programmed to become a Commander Droid for the invasion of Naboo. 

OOM-9's upper shoulders were painted a dull mustard yellow, and his back plating was removed to accommodate the standard command backpack, featuring an advanced power supply and several antennae for transmitting and receiving orders from the Central Control Computer, which would remain safely in orbit around the blue planet.  OOM-9 felt neither pride or trepidation at his new role; his programming was limited to collecting and compiling battle tactics and plans.

The new commander's first assignment was to organize the invasion of Naboo, which he did competently.   His programming was tested by the presence of two Jedi who had somehow stowed away on the landing ships and were loose in the swamp.  He assured his superiors that he could find them, and proceeded to double the patrol grid for STAPs and ground droids.

The droid's inability to find the Jedi seemed unimportant to either him or his masters, and his next assignment was as personal guard to the Viceroy in the Queen's Palace. OOM-9 regarded the refined architecture and carved marble with a soldier's practiced indifference.  His masters soon ordered him to transport the uncooperative Queen to Camp Four.   Expanding his priority protocols, OOM-9 delegated four of his security detail to oversee the transport, monitoring them on a secure channel from the Palace. OOM-9 stayed with the Neimoidians,  and continued to remotely control the search for primitive lifeforms in the swamps and ocean core.

After chasing the primitive Gungans from the underwater city, OOM-9 boarded an AAT battle tank and personally took command of the battle on the plains.  He ordered the first volley of shots against the Gungan shields, and realizing the inefficiency of this attack, halted the artillery, and sent in his massive infantry division.  OOM-9's charge successfully drove back the Gungan army, and he began marshalling his troops to rout them completely, when victory was cruelly stolen from him.  Far above in orbit, the Central Control Computer had been destroyed by a young boy in a stolen starfighter.  OOM-9's greatest moment of triumph was also his worst moment of defeat.  He fell to the ground, deactivated and useless.

	
