<B>Bespin<B>

Though the name Bespin actually refers to the planet, a gas giant on the outermost arm of its system, the title is often used to describe Cloud City as well.  Bespin is a large gas giant, roughly118,000 kilometers across, located in the system of the same name. The planet has layer upon layer of gaseous atmosphere, only a thin band of which is inhabitable by organic creatures.  The species indigenous to Bespin are uniquely evolved to make use of the rarified atmosphere, flying and floating through it like a giant ocean.  Beasts like the sharp-toothed velkers feed on immense living gas bags called beldons.  It is thought the beldons may metabolize gas to form Tibanna gas, the special and valuable vapor responsible for the construction of floating mining colonies such as Cloud City.

Floating repulsorlift cities are notoriously hard to build and maintain, but the lure of Tibanna mining has made such projects more attractive to mining corporations.  The first such settlement, known as Tibannopolis, lies disused and crumbling several kilometers away from Cloud City.  It is a haven for smugglers and independent prospectors.  Cloud City, on the other hand, is a profitable mining city, with casinos and expensive hotels on its upper layers, and cramped industrial quarters in its lower regions.  The bulk of the workforce is comprised of Ugnaughts, from nearby Gentes. The city is ruled by a Baron Administrator, the most recent being Lando Calrissian, who won the colony from the previous Baron, Raynor, in a sabacc match-with some help from the cybernetically-enhanced Lobot.  The aide sought to free the city from Baron Raynor's draconian grip, and found a friend and trusted ally in Calrissian.

Later, Cloud City became the focal point in Darth Vader's attempt to trap Luke Skywalker. Calrissian was forced to betray his friends, Han Solo and Chewbacca, but later used Lobot and the city guard to free the Rebels.  In the resulting aftermath, the Empire seized Cloud City and garrisoned in it.
