<B>Darth Maul<B>

The nature of the Sith is that they are unseen, they strike from the shadows and are unknown to their attackers.  So it is fitting that little information exists on the history of Sith Lord Darth Maul, other than that which can be deduced from speculation, given his associations and actions.

Lord Darth Maul appeared to be a Zabrak from Iridonia.  He abandoned all trace of his former identity when he took on his Sith name. For the glory of the dark side, he even etched painful Sith tattoos over his entire body.   The dark apprentice trained with Lord Darth Sidious  from an early age.  His skill with the lightsaber was obvious, and he fought with the flair and energy of one who is supremely confident in his abilities.  The double-bladed lightsaber he wielded was commonly regarded as a practice saber, but Maul adapted it for use against two opponents at once, possibly predicting his fight against Jedi Knights Obi-Wan Kenobi and Qui-Gon Jinn.

Among his other tools were the Sienar-designed  Sith Infiltrator, a starship equipped with a rare cloaking device.  He also used modified probe droids to find his prey, and a custom Sith speeder to chase it.

Darth Maul longed to attack the Jedi head-on, so intense was his hatred, but his master would not allow it, preferring to bide his time and wait for the right opportunity.  In the meantime, Maul undertook several covert missions for Sidious.  He hunted down recalcitrant Neimoidians, and even infiltrated the infamous Black Sun and emerged unscathed.   The Dark Lord also closely observed the invasion of Naboo.  Sidious instructed Maul to keep a close eye on the bumbling Neimoidians and ensure that nothing would go wrong. 

Maul was finally given his chance to fight Jedi after he traced Queen Amidala's fleeing starship to Tatooine.  There, he confronted Qui-Gon Jinn, raining a flurry of lightsaber blows down on the surprised Jedi.  Maul felt the older Jedi's strength ebbing, and pressed the attack.  So focused was he on destroying Qui-Gon that he didn't notice that the Queen's ship had closed the distance and hovered above them with its gangplank extended.  The Jedi surprised him with a sudden leap and was gone before Maul could pursue him.  However, there was no question in either warrior's mind that victory would have been Lord Maul's, given a few more precious moments.

So it was with extra confidence that Darth Maul confronted the Jedi again on Naboo, now wielding his deadly double-bladed weapon.  The Jedi Master fought valiantly, but it was the young Padawan that challenged Maul the most.  He separated the two, and dispatched the older man.  But in doing so, he unleashed a fury in Obi-Wan, and was hard-pressed to defend himself against the young Jedi's lightning-fast lightsaber.  Finally, Maul took advantage of Kenobi's unfocused attack and pushed him into a generator chasm.  Unfortunately for Maul, Obi-Wan Kenobi was strong in the Force, and summoned the strength to leap from the chasm, grab his fallen master's blade and slice the Dark Lord in half.  

Lord Maul died wondering how the dark side could have failed him. 

