<B>Pekt<B> 

The reptilian Trandoshans are not generally regarded among the galaxy for their honesty or bravery, and Pekt is no exception. Many of the worst Trandoshans have warred with the neighboring Wookiee planet Kashyyyk, harassing and raiding whenever possible, taking unfair advantage of the Wookiees' peaceful tendencies. But Pekt is legendary among his people for taking the conflict to a whole new level. 

Born on Trandosha into a powerful family, Pekt almost immediately began to expand his clan's empire.  As a young hatchling, he experimented with slave collars and restraints, using his servants as hapless victims.  Then as he entered his molt stage, he moved on to the Wookiee prisoners-of-war kept in his clan's garrison.  An especially sadistic being, even for a Trandoshan, Pekt realized what excellent slaves the Wookiees could become, if they could only be tamed.

Pekt used his father's fortune to research Wookiee biology, and developed a series of restraints and techniques to capture and enslave the proud beings.  His expertise grew, and he earned a certain degree of fame when he was consulted by bounty hunter Bossk.  He created a set of custom weapons for the bounty hunter, and in return, received a number of fine Wookiee pelts, which he gifted to his egg-litter. 

Gradually, Pekt's reputation for being a top-notch Wookiee-exterminator garnered him several jobs around the galaxy, working for bounty hunters, gangsters, and eventually the Empire.  It was rumored Pekt could clear a village of Wookiees in less than a standard week.  He hired a task force of ex-Trandoshan Army regulars, who assisted him in his sadistic tasks.  On one job when Pekt was quite young, a valiant Wookiee youth broke free of his bonds and seized Pekt in his massive paws.  The slaver's eyes stared coldly back as the Wookiee tore the Trandoshan's arms clean off.  The Wookiee was killed for his effort, and Pekt returned to Trandosha briefly.  Within a month, his arms had regenerated and he was back at the slave camp. 

But Pekt's ultimate triumph came when the Empire took control of Kashyyyk, and under advisement from Trandosha, enslaved the major cities of the planet.  Pekt was selected by the local Moff to oversee the entire slaving operation, and he drew up the plans for the Avatar Orbital Platform, the hub of misery for Wookiee slaves.  Pekt knew as long as the Empire controlled Kashyyyk, he could act with impunity, and he did - stepping up both his experiments and his slaving trade.  But Pekt's day of reckoning was yet to come.

