<B>Qui-Gon Jinn<B>

One of the most noble and wise Jedi was Qui-Gon Jinn-a man considered a maverick by his peers, but much beloved by those who knew him.  

Many Jedi observed that the venerable Master could have been a member of the Council, if not for his disregard for its codes and proclamations. While not an active critic of the Council, Qui-Gon definitely pursued the agenda of the Force as he perceived it, and did not necessarily take the advice of his brethren as gospel.

Qui-Gon Jinn was strongly connected to the Living Force, and could not ignore its powerful influence on him. He possessed a deep and abiding respect for all living things. He was very attuned to the Force, and often took long, meditation journeys into the depths of its mysteries, going far beyond where other Masters ventured. He was regarded with great admiration by most Jedi who knew him.

However, Qui-Gon's early career was marked by his failure with a student named Xanatos. The Padawan was strong with the Force, but too ambitious and impatient. Eventually, Xanatos left the Order to join his father Crion in a planetary civil war. Circumstances brought Qui-Gon and Crion together, and in a resulting battle, Qui-Gon was forced to kill the man. Xanatos was furious.  He fought with his Master and fled, disappearing into the galaxy. He returned, ostensibly as a changed man, but he secretly planned to trap Qui-Gon and his young Padawan named Obi-Wan Kenobi. The pair escaped and Xanatos fled again.

The experience left Qui-Gon despondent about his abilities as a teacher. He had trouble accepting the young Kenobi as his Padawan, but eventually the two became as close as father and son.  They participated in many adventures around the galaxy, including a war between Wookiee settlers and Trade Federation troops on Alaris Prime. He also believed he had found the Chosen One, during a mission on remote Tatooine: a slave boy named Anakin Skywalker.  He believed the will of the Force had brought them together.

But in the end, despite all Qui-Gon's wisdom and intuition, and his skill and grace with the lightsaber, he was cut down by Sith Lord Darth Maul, during the Battle for Naboo. Obi-Wan avenged his death, and agreed to his Master's last wish: train the boy Anakin to be a Jedi.

