<B>Captain Tarpals<B>

Captain Tarpals was a member of the Gungan Grand Army when Naboo was attacked by the Trade Federation.  Previously he had served as a leader in the Security Forces of Otoh Gunga, patrolling on his trusty kaadu, keeping the peace with a combination of wisdom, patience, and a long electropole.

Tarpals' family has a long history of military service, with each son serving in the Gungan Grand Army in some aspect.  Tarpals is the first of his family to merit the rank of Captain, however, and is considered quite a hero in his clan.  Add to this his distinguished peacetime duties in the security forces, and one can see why his clan treats him with a degree of reverence usually reserved for High Council members.  Tarpals, of course, downplays the worship modestly.  He believes he is but a simple Gungan serving his people.

One of the tasks assigned to the Captain was the banishment of Jar Jar Binks.   While the two weren't best friends, they were more than acquaintances, and it saddened Tarpals to have to finally banish the good-hearted but clumsy Jar Jar.   So imagine his surprise when the Gungan not only violated the 'nocombackie' law, but brought two Jedi outsiders with him.  Considering the usual punishment for such a violation is being 'pounded unto death,' Tarpals was puzzled by Boss Nass' decision to release Jar Jar again, but attributed it to some higher plan he was not privy to.

Just imagine his <i>further<i> surprise when he found himself on the battlefield next to General Jar Jar.  Any feelings of jealousy about the promotion were superceded by concern for his army and his soldiers, and Tarpals calmly took charge.  He led a mildly successful defensive strategy, but was ultimately overwhelmed by the sheer number of Trade Federation troops opposing him.

In addition to his role in the Battle of Naboo, Tarpals was instrumental in leading the Gungans to safety and fighting various smaller skirmishes against the invading droid army.   It was his organization that allowed the Gungans to regroup in the swamps and provide troops for Amidala's plan.
