In lesson one,
we talked about my theory that every time the music gets played, somebody gets paid. Every time the music gets played,
somebody gets paid. And I say that if you're an artist,
songwriter, or producer, or even a record company owner,
you should get paid and not played. And what do I mean by that? Everyone should be fairly
compensated either for their investment of time,
money, and talent. And as we move into this new
paradigm in this new digital age, that's gonna become even more important. I say that there are three big Ps,
three big principles for success in today's music industry,
powerful product, proper perspective, and we also
talked about professional attitude. Powerful product. It could be an audio recording, a video recording, an app or
a website that provides valuable services to help artists achieve
their goals of becoming successful. You need to have a proper
perspective to know that the asset value in those creations that
you come up with grow over time. Professional attitude is the third big P,
which is very, very important. You need to try to understand
the business, learn more. You're doing that by taking this course. But you also need to have respect for
everyone that you meet in the business because you never know who you're
gonna meet, going up and coming down. The music business is a blend of art and
commerce that evolves over time with technological advancement, and the spirit
and the determination of entrepreneurs. The music industry has constantly
reinvented itself in its over 100-year history, and we talked about the cyclical
nature of the music business, how things have gone up and down. And there's been many times that people
have said the music industry is dead, and that hasn't proved to be the case. The digital revolution is
the latest paradigm shift. And although major labels
in the 1990s went from six into the turn of the century,
into currently only three major labels, there's still great opportunity in the
future as we move toward a streaming and an access-based industry. There's been one constant in this
cyclical nature of the music industry, and it's an instrument, and
not a musical instrument, but a document. The exclusive recording artist agreement
that provides the basis upon which the music industry is built. And that's what we're going
to talk about in lesson two.