In addition to record companies and
artists making money from all of those valuable areas,
such as sales, both in stores. Physical sales of CDs,
sale of digital copies on iTunes, and Amazon, and other areas. There's another very important source
of revenue for record companies and artists that's starting to
grow Internet streaming. Internet Streaming. Streaming royalties is becoming more and
more important in the business. Any time a recording is digitally
transmitted, a digital transmission can occur either through Cable,
Satellite Radio, or Webcasting. The record company and artist are entitled
to be compensated for those uses. What's the problem? Right now the problem is that
the amount that's paid for those uses is so small, I remember years
ago someone saying that the music business is a business of pennies,
a business of pennies. Well the situation is, right now that for
digital streaming and Internet webcasting, those pennies are being broken
down to even smaller portions. Tenths of pennies. Tenths of pennies. So the amount that you'll receive,
both the record company and the artist will receive, for these types
of services depend on the types of uses. There's a couple of types
of uses I wanna talk about. First is the Non-Interactive Stream,
the non-interactive use. What is non-interactives? That's where the consumer, the person
that's listening to the web-cast cannot decide to listen to
a particular song multiple times. In other words it's similar to Pandora,
you punch or you put in the artist that you like and
Pandora will kind of program a radio station with other songs
that sound similar to this artist. In other words you don't
have the right to pick those particular songs
that you want to hear. Pandora because of that is paying royalties in the amount of
only a tenth of a penny. One tenth of a penny per stream. it's causing quite a bit of
rancor within the music industry. New services called interactive services. And interactive services are where
you can pick a particular song and listen to it multiple times. You can pick anything from
the vast catalog on a service. Such as, say, Spotify, and
listen to it as much as you want. Spotify also has a radio-like service,
similar to Pandora. And those royalties vary. The non interactive use, or
the radio-like service, through Spotify, the royalty rates might be smaller. A little more than a tenth of a penny. But for interactive use, where you
actually pick the songs and listen to them multiple times, that royalty rate can
increase to maybe three tenths of a penny. Very small. You say,
well how can you make money in that area? Well, that's been the problem currently. Many artists are very concerned with
the low amount of royalties that they're receiving at this point. But as new services, as new entrepreneurs,
as new innovative services are being developed, you're gonna find different
types of deals that are being struck by the record companies and
these Internet service providers. While Pandora pays a specific amount for
each stream, some of the new Internet services are entering into deals
with major record labels where they will not only pay per stream rate but they will
pay a portion of their advertising and subscription money that make
from their various subscribers. Those of you who are familiar with Spotify
know that you can listen to it for free or
you can subscribe on a monthly basis. And if you do that,
you don’t have to listen to the ads, and you can listen to any of
the music that you want. You have complete access to the music. Most of the newer Internet streaming
services, both Non-Interactive and Interactive, are basing their
business model on an ad and subscription model basis. What do I mean by that? Well they're selling ads that will play
maybe every three or four songs or they'll offer a subscription service
where you can pay a monthly amount. Then that will eliminate the ads and you can play any of the music
you want at any time. A lot of the record labels are entering
into special deals licensing their entire catalogs to these internet services. iRadio, Spotify. And they're receiving a percentage
of the advertising and subscription revenue generated
by these new services. And those royalties then are prorated
according to the specific steaming of the songs in their catalog. Independent companies or artists can license their music to
these internet services as well. And many of them use what is called
Aggregators, like Nimbit, TuneCore, or CD Baby, who act as middle people
who aggregate or put together a number of independent artists, and license
their music to these Internet services. Of course they get paid a fee for that, but it allows these artists to enter
into the market of Internet streaming. So while the Internet streaming
royalties are considered very low by a number of artists,
they feel it’s too low. As a matter of fact, a number of artists
have refused to allow their music to be streamed because of the low royalties. The hope is that as
the subscriber base grows, currently it's only a few million,
but should it reach scale for these various services,
maybe 50 million people or more. The amount of revenue available for these royalties to be prorated will
grow as well and artists, songwriters, and record companies will receive
a fairer share of that income. Now who accounts to the record company and
the artist for the revenue generated
from streaming services? Well, the RIAA, the Recording Industry
Association of America, established a specific performance rights organization
to handle these types of royalties. That organization is called Sound Exchange
and it's based in Washington DC. And every record company and
every artist needs to register with Sound Exchange to receive their
royalties from internet streaming and the digital transmission of their works. I'm always interested in artists receiving
their fair share from the use of their recordings, and I'm happy to say that the
recording labels, recording artists, and Sound Exchange came to
an agreement years ago. Making sure that the royalties
generated from the digital transmission of recordings would be split
between the artist and the record company in a fair and
equal way. The breakdown is 50% to the record
company, 45% to the featured artist, and 5% to the non-featured or
session musicians, or vocalists. So that money is paid directly
to the record company, directly to the featured artist,
and directly to the unions. But artists,
if you don't register with Sound Exchange, you can't receive your royalties. So, it's very important for you to
register with Sound Exchange, so that you can receive your royalties from digital
audio transmission and Internet streaming. As this Internet streaming model
continues to evolve, record companies and Internet service providers are coming
up with different kinds of deals now. A major label might license their entire
catalog of recordings to an Internet service provider in exchange for
being paid that 50% of the royalty directly to them, while allowing
the 45% to the featured artist and the 5% to the non-featured artist
to be paid through Sound Exchange. However, don't think this is a given. If you're signed to a major
label it's very important for you check your contract very carefully
to see if you're even entitled to royalties from these various services. In some contracts with major labels,
there will be a provision stating that any licensing of the record label's entire
catalog of sound recordings and even videos may not require them to
pay a royalty at all to the artist. So, this creates a great situation for
independent artists. And it's a great time to be
an independent artist and to own the rights to
the sound recording yourself. So that you can license
either through aggregators, like Nimbit TuneCore or others. You can receive the record company
royalties as well as the artist royalties. So, this is the best time to DIO,
do it ourselves. Build a team of people that can help
you build your own independent company, owning and developing the recordings,
both audio and video. Exploit those assets. On various platforms,
web casting, internet streaming, sales on iTunes, a licensing for
various movies and commercials. Building up their audience and once again
that gets back to powerful product. Building up those valuable assets in their
sounds recordings and only that interest to exploit it in a number of ways,
to build the value in their company.