The copyright isn't just one right. The copyright is really
a bundle of rights. And in this portion of the lesson,
we're gonna talk about and really closely examine the bundle of rights that make
up the copyright in the composition. Which is protected by filing
the performing arts, or the PA type of copyright registration. As I mentioned earlier, usually
publishers will sign co-publishing and administration agreements
with songwriters. Whereby the songwriters transfer
a 50% interest in the copyright to the composition to the publisher in
exchange for receiving roughly 75% of the income generated from the exploitation
of those compositions or songs. So let's look at the bundle of rights involved in the copyright
in the composition. I'm gonna talk about the four primary income generating rights of
copyright in the composition. The first is the right to reproduce and
distribute, which is commonly referred
to as the mechanical right. The mechanical right is the right
to mechanically reproduce a song. We talked about piano roles being
the first mechanical reproduction. Well there's been a number of
new configurations of recordings of music that also make up and
are considered mechanical reproductions. 78s, 45s,record albums,
cassettes, 8-tracks, CDs, and
currently we have digital downloads, which is considered a mechanical
reproductions for licensing purposes. So how is the money
made from this system?. Well, whoever makes that mechanical
reproduction and distributes it, usually the record company,
has to get the license to make the mechanical reproduction from
the publisher of that particular song. And the publishers do that by issuing
licenses to the record company, to be paid the mechanical royalty for the sale and distributions of
the recordings of their songs. As you know,
that mechanical royalty rate is currently 9.1 cents per copy for
recordings under five minutes, or $.0175 per minute for
recordings over five minutes. It's a substantial amount. Suppose you wrote one song, and songs
are really selling in the millions again. Singles are selling in the millions. For a period of time,
singles weren't even released, at the latter part of the 90s and
well into the beginning of this century. But since singles, through iTunes,
have become popular, you find a number of singles
selling over a million copies. So it isn't far fetched. Let's say you've written a song for
a major artist and it sells a million copies. Well at 0.091 cents per copy,
you're entitled to $91,000.00, that's what the publisher gets paid. Once again, under the co-publishing and
administration agreement, the songwriter gets 75% of the 91,000 or
roughly about $68,000. Now that's just for one single. Suppose you wrote a number of songs
on an artist's album, say ten. You wrote all the songs on an artist's
album, that sells a million copies. That's 910,000 in
mechanical royalties alone. And to the songwriters, $680,000. So you can see why the mechanical right is
such an important right to the songwriter. And I say still possibly the top
income generating right for the popular songwriter. Now let's talk about the second right in
the bundle of rights of the copyright of the composition. The right of public performance. Tthe right to publicly perform your song. No one can publicly perform your song if
you're a songwriter without getting your permission. Now how are you supposed to know? Well let's talk about it. What are public performances first? Public performances, your song being
played on the radio, being streamed on the internet, being played in night
clubs and arenas all across the world. Tell me, how is a songwriter supposed
to know when their song is being played on the radio station in Spokane,
Washington, San Diego, California, Tupelo, Mississippi,
Worcester, Massachusetts? It's impossible. It's impossible. And this is the reason why publishers and songwriters affiliate with
Performance Rights Organizations, PROs. And here in the United States, we have three primary
Public Performance Rights Organizations. They are ASCAP,
The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers, BMI,
Broadcast Music Incorporated, and SESAC, The Society of
European Stage Actors and Composers. These three organizations control about all of the songs that
you hear on the radio. I like to say that ASCAP and
BMI control about 45% each, of all of the songs that you
hear on the radio today. SESAC represents only about 10%, but
that organization is growing very quickly. And as a result of them having all of
the songs in the catalog in their catalog. And by that, I mean, BMI, ASCAP, and
SESAC, each try to affiliate with as many songwriters and publishers as possible, to
represent their public performance rights. A songwriter can only
affiliate with one of these organizations at a time to
represent their interests. So, how does BMI, ASCAP, and
SESAC collect their money? How do they make money for the publishers
and songwriters they represent? Each year, BMI, SESAC, and ASCAP go to all
of the radio stations across this country. And enter into licenses with those radio
stations, whereby those radio stations pay a certain percentage of their advertising
revenue for the rights to play any and all of the music in ASCAP,
BMI and SESAC catalog. So that they aren't violating the public
performance rights of publishers and songwriters. That's called a Blanket License. So ASCAP will go to a radio station or a conglomerate of radio stations
that are owned by one company. And say,
we are gonna give you a blanket license, or the right to play any of
the songs in our catalog for the payment of say 2% of your
advertising revenue for the year. Each of the performance rights
organizations will follow that same formula. Go to night clubs. In night clubs, you're gonna have music
played over the speaker system or by bands playing songs
in a particular venue. All three performance rights
organizations will go to clubs and say, I want you to pay me,
let's say it's a small club, $500 a year, and you can play
any of the songs in our catalog. They'll go to major arenas that might
hold 50 to 20,000 people for a concert. And they'll say to those arenas,
we'll give you a year's license so that any of the songs in our catalog can
be played in your arena without violating the performance rights of the publishers
or songwriters, for a set amount. Thousands of dollars because of
the vast size of those kinds of arenas. They'll go to Internet
streaming services and the streaming on the Internet
is a public performance. And so they'll demand from Rhapsody and
from Spotify, a certain amount of their income per year,
to pay for the rights, to publicly perform
all of the music in their catalog. So I like to say that all of
these organizations go out and collect revenue from all
these various sources. And they have what I
call a big pot of money. They also have a very unique
way of determining how much from this big pot of money
are we gonna allocate for the performance of each
particular song in our catalog. They have very complicated
formulas to determine that. Once they determine how much of
the big pot of money is allocable for the public performance of a particular
song, they split the amount and pay it 50% to the publisher and
50% directly to the songwriters. Once again, under a co-publishing and
administration agreement. The songwriter that makes
50% is also gonna get 25% of the publisher's share so
that they receive a total of 75%. While I'll say that the mechanical
right is still the most important income-generating right for
owners of the composition. Please be aware that,
in the new digital age, as we move from the business
of selling product and selling mechanical reproductions to the
new service model, the streaming model. You're gonna find that the public
performance right is gonna be even more and more important and generate more and
more money as time goes on. The next important right in the bundle of
rights of a copyright in a composition is the synchronization right. The right to synchronize
a song from one medium, usually the audio medium,
to the video medium. That occurs when you hear songs
that you've heard on the radio being played in the background
of movies or in commercials. Or you hear snippets of a song that might
not even be the recording of the original song, but certain elements of the song,
being used in these various new types of visual mediums, becoming
very, very important in the YouTube age. In order for people to synchronize
the songs from one medium to another, from the audio to the visual medium,
they have to obtain the rights to do so from the owners of the copyright and
the composition, the publishers. And usually these companies, movie
production companies, TV show producers who use music in the background or even
the foreground of scenes in their shows, have to obtain these rights from
the publishers and usually will pay a fee. Sometimes a flat fee for
the purpose of doing that. Sometimes these fees can
be very substantial. It really depends on how long the use is,
what the context of the use is, how popular is the song that the TV show
was trying to license from the publisher. All of those are factors that will
determine how much will be paid. So let's say a movie producer wants to use
a particular song that's very popular. And they wanna use this song in
the background scene of a movie. Well, the publisher because of the song's
popularity could possibly demand a high fee of say $50,000 for the use of
the song in that particular movie. So the publisher gets paid 50,000. And under most co-publishing and
administration agreements, the songwriter might receive
up to 75% of that income. So the songwriter knows that they're
gonna walk away with about 37 and a half thousand dollars. So you can see why this
is a very valuable right. I was just speaking of the use
of one song in one movie. That's the beauty of copyright. That's why I say it's
the most valuable asset. If you have a catalog
of a number of songs, they can each be used
in many different ways. They can be synchronized in commercials,
TV shows, videos, movies. So it becomes a tremendous
source of income. And as a result of the internet
continuing to expand, the use of video, the synchronization of
compositions into videos. This market is also developing very
fast and generating tremendous amounts of income for the owners
of the copyrights in compositions. We've talked about three of the rights
in the bundle of copyrights for the owners of the composition. That's protected by a filing a PA,
performing arts type of registration. The fourth right in the bundle
of copyright rights, for the owners of the composition copyright,
is the derivative right. That's the right to derive on new
work from a prior copyrighted work, and this gets into the issue of sampling. Sampling technically is the digital
lifting of a recording and placing it into another type of recording. But sampling is, or that term sampling,
is also used when snippets or portions of a composition, melody and lyrics are incorporated into
another copyrighted work. Let me give you an example
of a derivative work. On this page, you're gonna
find a link to a recording and a song called Candy by Cameo. Yeah, that's the group I recorded with. Well, I wasn't in the group
when this record was made, but it became a top 5, hot 100 hit. Very popular song, written by the group's
founder Larry Blackman and Tommy Jenkins. Well the song was a big hit in 1988. Went to top five in the charts. Generated a lot of money,
mechanical income. It was played on the radio so it created a lot of public performance
income for Tommy and Larry. Very popular in the 1980's. Here's the beauty of owning
a copyright in a composition. In the year 2000, Mariah Carey decided to make a new song that
incorporated elements of Candy. The music track was primarily
the track from Candy. She didn't use the actual recording,
she brought Cameo into the studio to make a new recording of the song,
just like the music sounded back in 1988. So you can believe that Larry and Tommy
were thrilled to know that Mariah Carey in 2000, after coming off 10
million plus selling albums, was gonna use their song
to create a new song. Well Mariah had to obtain
the derivative right from Larry and Tommy and their publishing company to make
this new song, which was titled Loverboy. And you'll be able to see the link
on this page for Loverboy as well. I urge you to listen to Candy,
and then listen to Lover Boy. In Loverboy you're gonna hear Mariah
with a whole different melody, and a whole different set of lyrics
work with the music tracks and other elements of Candy. It was truly a derivative work. For her to obtain the rights to make
a derivative work of Candy, she had to enter into a licensing agreement
with Larry and Tommy's publisher. And you can bet that Larry and Tommy's
publisher decided that instead of just taking a one time fee,
they decided to ask for rights in Mariah Carey's new song,
Loverboy. So when you check the credits for
Loverboy, you're gonna find the writers of that song are Mariah Carey,
Tommy Jenkins, and Larry Blackmon. So now, Tommy and
Larry not only have copyright interest in the composition Candy, but they also have
a copyright interest in this new song. This derivative song, Loverboy. Mechanical right, the public
performance right, the synchronization, and the derivative rights are the four
primary income generating rights for compositions for
popular songwriters today. But they aren't the only
rights in the bundle of rights of copyright in the composition. There are two other rights as well. The Grand Right. The Grand Right is the right to take
a non-dramatic song, in other words, a song that's recorded and used on
a recording that's sold to the public and then adapting that non-dramatic version
of the song into a dramatic setting. In other words, a Broadway play or
other type of traveling play. The play Mamma Mia was developed and built
on the songs of the great group ABBA. So the songwriters and publisher of
the songs written by ABBA had to issue licenses to the producers of that
Broadway play, to give them the grand rights to dramatically interpret
those great ABBA songs. And lastly, the print right is
also a very important right within the bundle of rights for
the copyright owners of the composition.