Technological innovation and
entrepreneurship were crucial to the development of the music industry
in the early part of the 20th century. But by mid century there were
a number of new innovations and entrepreneurs, who wanted to
participate in the further development, particularly in the record industry. One was Ahmet Ertegun,
the son of a Turkish immigrant. He loved black music. He loved blues. He loved what was happening
on the jazz scene. A dance-able form of the blues,
called the jump blues. He started a record company in New York,
with a partner called Atlantic Records. And he was a part of a new wave of music
called R and B, or Rhythm and Blues. He wasn't the only one, the same thing
was happening on the west coast, with Art Rupe,
who was the owner of Specialty Records. And that was a company that
recorded great blues and R and B singers from the birthplace of
popular music, New Orleans, Louisiana. You had technological
advancement in television. The development of television. In the 1950's, and its impact on radio. Radio in the early part of the century,
from the start of radio, really had what were called
serial dramatic series, where you had voice actors who would
come in and act the parts out on radio. Well, the radio station owners and
all of the people that participated in that process were concerned
when television came in, because they thought that type of
programming would transfer over the TV. And in fact, it did. And it really left a void in
the radio market which was filled by radio stations playing records. To a greater degree than ever. And of course that lead to some
people being disgruntled as well, they thought that the playing of records
and replacing the serial dramatic series didn't have the same kind of quality,
as they did the serial radio programs. Jukeboxes. A brand new technological invention in the
early 50s, latter part of the 40s and 50s. Changed the music industry as well. It enabled people to go into a restaurant,
to a drugstore, put a coin in the machine and
play any record that they wanted. Well, that was a little
disturbing to a number of people. Live musicians felt that
they were displaced, because instead of bringing bands into
clubs, a club could even have a jukebox. And it could displace them. You also have record companies that felt, if people can go out and have the records
they want to have played at any time, maybe that would cut down
on their record sales. Well that didn't prove to be the case
after all, because bubbling underneath of all of this, was a new form of music. And certain cultural shifts,
as you had baby boomers, teenagers are born to soldiers
who came back from the war, who were coming of age in the mid-fifties
and had a lot of discretionary income and really bought into this new form of music,
which was based on blues, gospel, pop music and R and B music. Rock and roll, which exploded. The music industry exploded
particularly the recording industry, which went from a total
of $200 million in income in 1954, to over 604 million in 1958. During that four year period,
you had that great growth. The spirit of entrepreneurship
continued to grow, even with some of the artists
during this period. Sam Cook, a pop singer as well as an R and
B singer, started his own record company. He started his own publishing company,
and the great Ray Charles renegotiating his contract with Atlantic Records decided
to leave that company and go with ABC records, because ABC Records allowed
him to own his own master recordings. So this start of entrepreneurship
continued to grow over that period. Other creative talents also
became interested in becoming entrepreneurs in the record industry. A young song writer from Detroit Michigan
Barry Gordy had written a couple of songs, a couple of hits as a matter of fact,
for great R and B artists at the time, Jackie Wilson. He eventually decided to
start his own record company, in Detroit called Motown Records. Which went on to become world-renowned and inspire other creative talents
to start their own labels. One of those other talents was
Herb Alpert, who as a bandleader and a trumpeter had tremendous hits
with his band Tijuana Brass, and he decided to partner
with a great record man named Jerry Moss to start A&M Records
in the middle of the 60s. The explosion of R and B, rock & roll and soul music led to the British
invasion in the mid 60's. And the Beatles, who grew up in England,
hearing the great blues music and also the great Motown hits,
put their own spin on it and came to America and
created a phenomenon like none other. The sale of records exploded. At that time, 45s and singles on 45s,
two sided, one song on each side, were the predominant configuration,
sales configuration. Albums Which really started in the 1950s,
also were starting to gain some traction. And as the development of rock music and the growth of R and
B music continued into the 70s, albums started to really take off and
become very, very popular. Also during this period, in the 1960s
you had the development of reel to reel audiotape and cassette tape,
which kind of changed the game. It enabled people to take the music
from the vinyl records and transfer it to this type of configuration. To the audio tape configuration. It created great problems. People felt that they
could create their own, and didn't feel they actually
did create their own playlists. And also they were able to
make copies like never before, to share with their friends. And that became a big concern
to the record industry. As we moved into the 70's and 80's, a number of other things started to
happen, other technological advancements. Disco music in the mid 70's lead to
an entire new wave of entrepreneurs entering the business starting their
own production companies and labels, selling 12 inch singles to the masses and
to the clubs, the disco clubs played these
singles non-stop all night. But just as disco music hit
it's peak in the mid 70s and in 78 or 79, almost just as fast as
it's medioric rise, it was over. Disco was dead. The Chicago radio station had
a party at a Chicago Cubs game, where they burned disco records and
just as fast and the rapid ascent that disco music made in the mid 70s,
it had just as fast of a death. And once again, the naysayers
said the music industry was dead. But the fact of the matter is, is that
the 1980s brought about more innovation that created a brand new market for
the music industry. Sony released the first
portable cassette player, the Walkman,
in the early part of the '80s. And it transformed the industry. That was the first, well really not
the first because you had transistor radios back in the 1950s, which kind
of transformed the industry as well. But in the 1980s, the Walkman,
the personal cassette player enabled people to carry their
playlist In their pockets, and listen to whatever music
they wanted to listen to. It transformed the industry and
it gave it the kind of boost that it needed to
try to build itself again. And then in 1981 and
1982, MTV, a brand new Music Television Network emerged and created the music video market which
spawned great hits over the 1980s. And also created great artists and
changed the industry in a great way. Of course you can't ignore the impact
of the great Michael Jackson, and his Thriller album which
also provided a boost. You had another technological development. The CD, that came in in
the early part of the 80's. And a lot of people including
me really had questions about. how effective the CD would be and
how it would really catch on. After all the CD costs three times
the cost of a vinyl record and a cassette. And when I first heard about it I
said I would never buy any product, that I would have to pay
triple the price for. I could get three cassettes for
the price of a CD. It can't sound that good. All the marketing people saw differently,
and they really promoted the CD as
the one having superior digital sound. And also being indestructible. And I remember the first time really
hearing a CD at my cousin's house, in his basement. And it was a Michael Jackson album. And as I closed my eyes and
listened to the music, it was as if I was in
the studio with Michael. And that's what really changed it for me. I could really see the future,
really see that CDs would evolve, and be the next evolution
of the music business. Now around that same time in the 70s and
80s, as albums became very popular and sold in great numbers on both cassette and
in vinyl, as this new Configuration of CDs
started to take off in the 80s, major corporations really took
an interest in small, independent labels. They really saw the value of music and
selling recordings. The investment was much lower than making
a film, and the return could be much greater, because you can invest in many
more artists, than you could in one film. So the risk was lessened. In addition, during that time period, the accounting practices of many of the
independent labels experience a change. They became more reliable and
more verifiable. And so the corporations really felt that
this was an industry that was poised for major corporate investment and
that's what the industry did. In the 1990s, CD sales took off as many
people tried to replace their vinyl and cassette collections,
with the same records this time on CDs. The growth of CD sales in
the 1990s was remarkable. And as a result, record companies and
publishing companies became very valuable commodities, and major corporations
started investing in a big way. And as the 90s went on, many of these
corporations started to merge as well. But there were other things
happening in the music industry. At that time, as the record
companies became flush with cash, from selling these CDs. The record companies many times
became bloated with employees. They started signing too many acts. The quality of the acts might not have
been at the level that they should have been, to appeal to the public. During that time some people would
say that record companies got so greedy by the end of the 20th century
that they stopped releasing singles. And if you really wanted that one track, that single that you really loved,
you had to buy the entire CD. Truly the record companies felt that, the good times would never end, but
they'd soon find out otherwise.