As I mentioned at the top of the lesson,
there are various managers that provide services to the artist to
help them achieve success. Two of the other types of managers
are business managers and road managers. What are business managers? Business managers are usually accountants,
and it's important for you to try to have a business manager
that is certified in the state that they conduct their business. They're called Certified Public
Accountants here in the United States. Many business managers are CPAs and
they're responsible for keeping track of the income and making
sure all of the expenses are paid for the artist including their taxes. Sometimes, they're involved in tax
returns, preparing and filing tax returns. Business managers also get
involved in investments, could, all of them don't, but
some of them could also be involved in advising the artist on
investment opportunities. Business managers also work with personal
managers in determining the best routing of tours to keep the cost down, so
that the artist can take more money home. They might be also involved in
determining how many band members, how many, how big the crew is going to be,
to really show and project a certain amount of income
that the artist knows, that they're gonna take home at the end of that
grueling, very important touring cycle. Road managers also play a very
important role in the artist's career. Once again, touring and
live performance is so important and a huge revenue stream for
most successful artists. So, you need to have a road manager that
really understands the dynamics of being on the road, because the road manager is
put in a position of having to please, not only the artist and making sure the artist has everything they
need to give a dynamic performance and fulfill all of the other responsibilities
the artist has on the road. But they also need to make sure
that the live promoter and the venue operator is happy and getting what they need to make sure
that the live performance is a success. If you're new to the music business and
really wondering what kind of role you're gonna play, I have to say that
being a road manager is a really, really good idea to start your career. Of course, you're going to have to start
as a roadie, you're gonna have to lift equipment and really do everything
that the act needs to have done. But if you really rise to the position
of being the actual road manager, it can put you in a position of
networking, not only with the band that you're really working for, but other bands
that are on the bill in various cities. You get a chance to meet tour promoters. You get a chance to meet radio promoters
as well as radio programmers, and record company promoters. So, it's a great way to get into
the business and to meet a lot of people. A great career for people that want
to start in the music industry. Let me tell you a story
about the importance and the influence of a road manager. Once again, the road manager's job is to
make sure that the act has everything it needs, to make sure that the act is
where they're supposed to be on time. I went to a performance by one of my
clients years ago at a theater that used to be called The Westbury Music Theater
in Long Island. And I went to the show, and after the show,
I went back to the hotel with the band. And I remember distinctly that
the road manager told the crew, and the artist, total of about 26 people
that they had to be on the bus. This must've been maybe around 12:30 at
night, and he said all right everybody, you can upstairs if you want to take
a very short nap, you can do that. But everybody has to be on the bus
by 2 o'clock, we're leaving at two. And when he said it,
in my mind I was thinking, there's no way he's gonna get 26
people on that bus by 2 o'clock. They won't leave here until 4 o'clock,
I'm sure. So, I stayed down at the bar in the lobby,
and I remember talking to other people in the lobby, and as time
started to pass, I looked at my watch. And, it was about 1:30 and
maybe one person came down and they loaded their things on the bus and
I said, yeah, just like I thought, they wont leave here before four. It got to a 1:45, maybe two or
three other people came down. Once again, I'm thinking, no way. 1:50, three or four more,
but within that last ten minutes before 2 o'clock,
there was a rush to the bus. And just like the tour manager said,
I was amazed when that bus was packed and
on the road by 2:10, 2:15. And it was important for the road
manager to really impress upon them the importance of them being on the bus
at 2 o'clock because their next show, the next night was somewhere in North or
South Carolina, a ten or 14-hour ride. And the artist probably had
radio stations interviews in the afternoon as well as sound check. So, that tells you the importance of
a road manager, because that was a 26-day tour, which means that this was
something that happened every night. The road manager is responsible for making sure the artist is
where they have to be on time. So, how do business managers and
road managers get paid? Well, business managers with
any kind of experience and success will probably want to be paid
a commission of 5% of the artist's gross. Whereas, road managers many times
are paid salary, as well as, all of the expenses on the road.