The music business is the intersection
of art and commerce, and is built around technological
innovation and entrepreneurship. We are currently involved
in a paradigm shift from the physical configuration
to the digital format. And in the midst of this change, a lot of people have been saying
that the music industry is dying. The music industry's dead. Well, I wanna tell you that those
rumors are greatly exaggerated. Now, while the recording industry sector
of the music business has grown smaller, other areas like live performance
has reached record growth. The increase in digital sales of both
albums and singles, streaming, and even subscription services
are growing as well. Now this isn't the first time that people
have said that the music industry is over. That's been said a number of times
over the over 100 year history of the music industry as we know it. Noted astronomer and author Dr Carl Sagan,
the late Dr Carl Sagan said, in order for you to understand your
future you must know your past. All right, so let's go back to
the beginning of the music industry as we know it. Let's go back to the 1890s. In the 1890s you had traveling shows,
minstrel shows, unfortunately [LAUGH] white
people in blackface and many black people in blackface,
singing songs that the public enjoyed. Was there a business around this
other than the live performance? Yes there was. What was that business? It was the sheet music business. Sheet music was selling like
records sold in the 20th century. Sheet music was the product that was
being sold other than live performances. A burgeoning business. You had entrepreneurs at that time. You had companies that started. Shapiro, Bernstein and company. You had Mills Music. Companies that are still around today
started as publishing companies. Printing sheet music, which sold. At that time you had middle class
families who had pianos in their parlors, so if they went to a minstrel show or
vaudeville show, a few days after they
go to the music store. And the only way for
them to hear those great songs that they enjoyed a few nights before was to
buy the sheet music and take it home and start playing the music and
singing the songs. Great business for a 10,
15-year run, I'd say. But then you had the shock
of a new product that came into existence shortly
after the turn of the century. A new type of product,
a new configuration of music, of songs. The piano roll. The first mechanical
reproduction of a song, the piano roll was the first mechanical
reproduction to become popular. The perforations in the paper enable
the keys to go down right in time and you hear the same melodies
of a song that you've heard. What was the reaction of
the publishing companies at that time? Well, you can bet their reactions were,
wait a minute. Our business is over! Who's gonna wanna buy the sheet music and
have to play the piano and sing the songs when they can hear the piano being
played as a result of the piano roll? The music industry's over! Was it over? No. Congress got involved and
amended the Copyright Act to ensure that the publishers of those compositions
got paid a mechanical royalty each time one of the those
piano rolls was sold. Was the industry over? Did it hurt the print business? Not at all. The print business flourished even more
and piano rolls flourished even more. An early entrepreneur in the recording
industry was a man named Harry Pace. Harry Pace was a partner with
the great blues founder, the founder of the blues, the father
of the blues, the great WC Handy. And in the early 1920s, he saw a market
for black female blues singers. And he started a company in
Harlem called Black Swan records. Many people think that Motown was
the first black-owned record company. But no, it goes all the way back to
the beginning of the record industry. Then as you got into the 1920s,
recordings became popular. Selling records became popular. And the first popular records were really
recorded by black female blues singers. Mamie Smith, Ethel Waters,
in the early 20s became mega recording stars as a result of
them selling records in the 20s. How do the publishers feel about that? There was some concern, of course. They were going to get paid
their mechanical royalty, but clearly they thought, oh my goodness,
the print business is over. Piano rolls didn't kill us, but
records, people can buy records and hear the songs whenever they want to. Why would they want to
buy the print music? As it turned out,
there was no problem whatsoever with that. Recordings helped
the publishing industry and the print music sales
even to expand further. Then, of course, we came to the 1930s and
the Great Depression. Decimated the music business. Once again, people legitimately
thought the record industry was over. People can't afford to buy records. Vaudeville shows couldn't
afford to go out on the road, people couldn't afford their tickets. But at that time,
another technological innovation, radio, which had really started
some years before, but at that point they had primarily
broadcast news reports. But in the 1930s, radio stations and
radio networks decided to bring bands in. The bands couldn't work on their own so
they brought them into the studios. And they let them play
their music in the studios. The recording industry thought,
well, once again, and the publishing industry as well, thought,
we're gonna have a real problem here. It's not p to p that bothered them. It wasn't peer to peer a hundred
years ago that concerned people. It was a to e. A to e. Air, radio waves in the air
reaching consumer's ears, was the concern of the recording
industry and the publishing industry. Why is anybody gonna
wanna print sheet music? Why is anybody going to even buy records
when they can hear this music for free? Our industry is over. Was it over? Not at all. You had radio stars that became
record stars, because there was an increase in the sales of the records
as a result of the radio promotion. Sheet music continued to sell. William Paley was an entrepreneur as well,
and in 1927 he bought 16 radio stations, primarily for the purpose of advertising
his father's cigar business. But that group of stations, the Columbia
Broadcasting System, CBS, went on to play a prominent role, not only in the music
industry but in mass media in general. But then you had the Second World War. And the use of lacquer
had to be restricted. Lacquer was used to make records,
78's as they were called, because they moved around the turntable
at 78 revolutions per minute. These were single records. They called them singles because
they had one song on one side and one song on the other. But they couldn’t make them
during the war because all of the materials were used for
the war effort. Most of the males were
away fighting the war. Once again,
people said the industry’s over. It's not gonna happen. And once again,
that technological innovation, radio, this time with the creation of
the Armed Forces Radio Network. 90 stations across the whole world
creating that a to e experience. But not just for Americans,
that was the first time that many foreigners had the opportunity
to hear this great American music. And what kind of impact did that
make on people across the world? They're hearing this music and
they've never heard anything like it. It's got Afro rhythms. It's got European content. It's this popular music, this dance music was something that was completely
fascinating to people all over the world. So what seemed to be one of the darkest
hours, clearly on the political and social scene with the World War,
turned out to be the boost that the record industry
needed to further expand after the war. And there was great expansion
of the music industry. When the soldiers came home,
the sale of instruments exploded. You can bet that there were
soldiers in the European front that were in the ditches and doing their off time when they listened
to the Armed Forces Radio Network, heard the great music of
the Duke Ellington Band, Count Basie. You can believe some of them possibly
said, if I make it out of this war alive, when I get home,
I'm gonna pick up a saxophone and blow it just like Lester Young. Yeah, I wanna play like the Pres and you can believe me, when they got home,
that's exactly what they did. Instrument sales exploded and
you had an entrepreneur that came on the scene at that time in
1945 that saw a great opportunity. An entrepreneur that said,
here's a need that needs to be filled. What is that need? Well, if these GIs come home from
the war and they have the GI Bill, which was a government program that
allowed the government to pay for the tuition for veterans to go to college
or to advanced training of some sort. This entrepreneur said,
I know a lot of these vets that are coming back really wanna
know how to play like Lester Young. They wanna be a part of a big band. But the only undergraduate programs or
college level programs, advanced programs for music were in conservatories
that only taught classical music. This entrepreneur said no,
no that's not what they want. I think they want to understand and
be able to play in bands, big bands, jazz music. So he started in 1945
the Schillinger House, and I'm speaking of Lawrence Berk,
the founder of Berklee College of Music. And you wonder,
when I said the Schillinger House, that was the forerunner of
Berklee College of Music. In the 50s, Lawrence Berk decided to name
the college after his son, Lee Berk. Berk-Lee, a great entrepreneur study that
led into the middle of the last century. Technical innovation and
entrepreneurship were hallmarks of the music industry in the first
half of the 20th century, and would become even more
significant in the second half.