Although a royalty rate of
13 to 16% of wholesale is common in the major label world,
and sub labels, and production companies that
deal with with major labels. There are other smaller,
independent labels that might offer a different royalty rate,
a different way to compute the royalties. Some of the smaller labels might be
willing to sign you to only a one or two album deal. And they might be willing to pay you
a 50% profit sharing arrangement. So what does that mean? Well, the independent label will pay for
the cost of production, manufacturing, distribution, marketing. And they will take all of those costs,
and after all of those costs are recouped from the money that comes in,
they will split the profits 50-50. Now, that's a very,
very interesting arrangement. Once again, all labels don't do that. Some smaller,
independent labels might do that. But I really wonder if they're
kind of basing that off another provision in a major label agreement,
that we're gonna talk about right now, that's very important. We talked about the royalty rate for
sales of recordings. But in most label agreements, when the
sound recordings are used in other types of situations, where the record company
licenses the recordings for other uses, the record companies usually split
whatever they make 50-50 with the artist. Those are called third party uses. Let me give you an example
of third party uses. Synchronization licenses,
we talked about that a little earlier. When sound recordings are used
in commercials, in TV shows, in the background scene of a movie,
those are third party uses. And usually record companies
charge a pretty sizable fee for that use, based on how long
the song is used in the movie, or what the context of the use is, what
the budget of the movie production is. But those fees can range from $5,000, possibly even up to $1
million dollars per use. It's a very, very valuable source
of revenue for record companies. Let's talk about some other
third party licenses. You might have bought a greeting card
recently that, when you opened it up, it had a recording that played. I know I bought one for
my granddaughter a couple of years ago. It was one of the Rick James songs,
it was Party All the Time or something. It was her birthday,
and you open it up, and it was the recording
of Rick James playing. Those musical cards became very popular,
that's a third party license. The record companies license those
recordings to American Greetings and the Hallmark card company. So that they can insert them in the cards,
so that they can play in the cards. It became a very valuable source of
revenue for record companies, three or four years ago. Another third party use of recordings
are licensing the recordings to one record company to put together a
compilation, like the NOW series of albums that have become so
popular over the past 15 or 20 years. And those are CDs, pretty much, that have all of the hit recordings
over the past year or so. And those are recordings
from various labels. One label licenses those recordings
from all of the other labels, and put it on one CD and sell it. Those albums really became top sellers
over the past five to ten years. However, as digital downloads and
iTunes has become very popular, people can basically put
together their own playlist. So the popularity of that
has diminished a little. But that's typical of
a third party party use. Those record companies agree
to a royalty split for licensing those recordings
to that particular company. And the record company and
the artist split those royalties 50-50. Now here is a big issue in the music
industry that I'm very concerned about, and many other people in
the industry are concerned about. Is a digital download
a sale of a recording, or is it a third party license? Is the record company actually
selling that product to iTunes, when they deliver that file for iTunes
to put on their server and then sell? Or are they licensing that
recording to iTunes to sell? The difference between licensing and
sale is very significant. So what's the different between a sale and
a third party license? Well, usually in the sale situation, the record company is bearing all the cost
of the production, the manufacturing, the distribution,
the marketing of that product. And as a result of all of those costs
that they invest in, they feel that they should get the majority share of
the money that's generated from that. And this is the reason why
artists only get paid 13 to 16%. But in a third party license, the record
company usually just licenses the sound recording, delivers the sound recording
to whichever company, Hallmark Cards. Who makes the cards,
who distributes the cards, markets those cards, and
bears all of that expense. To that record company that
puts together the Now series. That record company makes the albums, distributes the albums,
bears all of those costs. All right, so
let's look at digital downloads. What does a record company do? With the digital download, the record company basically delivers that
sound recording to Amazon, to iTunes. They put it on their servers,
they market it. Now the record company does,
still does a little marketing. But the record company,
on a digital download through iTunes or Amazon, they don't manufacture a CD. They don't distribute it, they don't bear
the cost of putting it in a warehouse. They don't have all those
costs associated with a sale. So should record companies apply a sale royalty of 13 to 16% for
digital downloads? Or should they pay the 50%
third party license? Well, that's been a big
dispute over the years. As a matter of fact, Eminem's production company filed
a lawsuit on that very point. And really had a decision in that case, rendered by a judge kind of
indicating that the judge felt that a digital download was in fact like
a third party license and not a sale. Unfortunately, that case settled, so that there isn't any legal precedent for
that at this point. But it did create a situation where
at least record companies and artists are having that discussion. Maybe the digital download should be
considered a third party license. And therefore the artist
should be entitled to 50%, rather than a sale where they
would only receive 13 to 16%.