I want you start listening to records a 
little differently than you're used to. most of us we listen to records to enjoy 
them and we're kind of grooving on the time feel, and the mood of the piece. 
And we're going to go along with the flow of the solo. 
You may notice some moments that you know, sound especially good to us and we 
kind of just enjoy them as they come along. 
But I want you to try to analyze a little more about what goes into an 
improvisation. Imagine for instance, that you have a 
student, who doesn't know anything about improvising, but he's interested in 
finding out. And one of the things you decide to do, 
is play him a solo and then break it down for him. 
Explain, here are the different kinds of things that are going on in this solo. 
things like what style is it? What you know, time feel is it? 
how do, what are the sections of the solo? 
Is it eight bar sections? Or is it four bar sections? 
How does the tune break down? what kind of intervals are being 
featured, what kind of rhythm figures are being featured? 
This sort of thing. So, this is where we come to part one of 
the assignment for this week. I've recorded a solo on piano and you're 
going to hear the audio portion of this. After I played it I wrote out the notes 
that I played and listen to it a few times, look at the written notes. 
And then go to your computer keyboard and write a description of what my solo is 
made up of. Again, like I say, what kind of intervals 
am I using, what is the breakdown of the song? 
What's the tempo and time feel? Things like that don't get carried away 
and write a ten-page dissertation on this 32 bars of music. 
it seems like every time I assign something like this, somebody goes crazy 
and, and it's down to analyzing every single note, somehow. 
all this should fit on one page it's an overview of the kind of things that I 
used when I was soloing to make up this particular improvisation. 
So, once you've got your description done, upload it to the site, that's part 
one. Part two is a continuation of this song. 
Download the play along tract. there are two versions, one is piano, 
base and drums, that's for most of you And one version is just for piano 
players, that is, just base and drums because you don't want to have two pianos 
competing on the, on the recording. So, I want you to play along, with the 
recorded track, and see how you do with this particular set of chord changes. 
If you're a, an, an experienced improviser, this will be real easy for 
you to do and you'll knock it off in no time. 
If you're new at this, it may be more of a challenge. 
And but do, try the best that you can try to find notes that work on the harmonies 
and see if you can keep up with the flow of the harmonies. 
It's a place to start. And next week we will look at the 
vocabulary of the improviser. That is the cord scales and the cords 
that we use for playing. in the meantime good luck with this 
assignment. For part two, when you have your MP3 
created, upload it to the site. And and then you'll be complete for this 
week. Good luck with it, and I'll see you here 
next week.