The paradigm shift from
physical to digital has really taken a drastic toll on
the major record labels. Where there were six major
record labels in the 80s and 9os, currently there's only three. Now what are these major record labels. Just what do they do? Well, they aren't like the labels of old,
where you had an entrepreneur who might have been an artist or a song
writer, like Berry Gordy or Ahmed Erdogan, that really got involved in
the creative process to a great degree. These major labels are really
major conglomerates. And their primary job is manufacturing, marketing, and distributing the music
through all different platforms. They may not get so involved, to some
degree they do, on the creative level. What they have are subsidiary and sub-labels that provide
those kind of services. So you have three major
record labels currently. Sony Music Entertainment,
a Japanese concern, Universal Music Group,
owned by French conglomerate Vivendi, and the Warner Music Group, recently
purchased by Leonard Blavatnik of Russia. These are the major labels. And I should say major manufacturers and
marketers and distributors, of up to, 85 to 90% of
the records that are sold today. They carry that kind of clout. All right. Let's talk about the major labels and
their subsidiary and sub-labels. Universal Music Group has a number of
influential and significant sub-labels and subsidiaries like Island/Def Jam, the
great Interscope label, Geffen Records, Berry Gordy's Motown records are now
distributed through Universal Music Group. And most recently, Universal Music Group
purchased the catalog and contracts of EMI, Priority and Capitol Records, reducing the number
of major labels from four to three. Sony Music Entertainment
distributes the great catalogs and the artists that are assigned to Columbia,
Epic Records, Arista, J Records and Jive Records, a great cadre of historic labels that has had a tremendous
effect on the music industry. And lastly, the Warner Music Group, Distributes labels like Elektra, Atlantic,
and of course, the Warner label. You know, it's amazing that,
even in this day and time of DIY, you find many artists that
wanna sign with major labels. But then at the same time, you have
a number of other artists that would say, why in the world would you
want to sign with a huge company that may not pay
that much attention to you? Well, the people that feel that
they need to be with major labels, like the prestige of
being with a major label. They feel that that gives them
clout not only as an artist, but they may have aspirations as producers,
and wanna work with other artists
that are signed with the labels. And by saying that they're
signed to Columbia, it can open up new opportunities for them. Most of these artists also mention
the fact that these major labels do have a distribution system that is wide and
vast, particularly in the physical space. And I can tell you that
that is really true. And here's the thing, major labels
are tremendous at expanding your market. I find it remarkable that a major
label can decide on a particular date to have your recordings in
record stores internationally. They can gear all of their
marketing effort for the release of that record,
on that particular date, and I have to say that I am very
impressed with major record labels. As an attorney representing an artist,
I fought them on a number of issues. But years ago, I was able to get one of my client's
marketing plans from their record label. And as I thumb through the marketing plan I was amazed to see all
of the various areas. The company had really structured specific
marketing and promotion activities. And the cost of those activities, the cost to have an ad in a national
magazine, thousands of dollars. The cost to start an Internet fan club or to promote through the Internet,
thousands of dollars. The cost to pay the expenses
of the artist to appear on a nationally or
internationally broadcast or televised talk show, thousands of dollars. And so, it's amazing to see that
record companies are able to not only meet those expenses, but also to have
a distribution network which enables them to have that record in stores, nationally and even internationally,
on a particular date. Because, as that marketing is focused for that release date,
they have the mechanism. And you certainly want your audience,
who you've targeted that marketing and promotion to, to be in the position
to go into the store and pick up that record on that date. A growing trend in the music
world today is for independent labels to start off on
an independent distributed basis. And as they build their market, affiliate
with major labels solely for distribution. This market has really taken
off over the past few years, as you've had great, new, independent
labels like Big Machine Records, that releases the recordings
of Taylor Swift. Great bands like Mumford & Sons working with the independent label Glass Note
that is now distributed by a major. Vampire Weekend with the Beggars Group. Adele is also affiliated
with the Beggars Group, and it's a tremendous force in the industry. Macklemore and
Lewis had their own label that became so popular on their own that they
ended up affiliating just for distribution purposes through
one of the major labels. So that's a growing area of the industry. But now, let's look at this from
the historical perspective. Back in 50s and 60s, and
even in the 70s to some degree, most recording artists had to have a label in order for
their product to reach the market. I'm talking about the pre-synth,
the pre-drum machine, the pre-sampler age,
when you went into a studio. As an artist, usually most artists
didn't have the money to afford the cost of studio time,
hiring an engineer. Paying all the of session players that you
needed to put together your recording. Back in those days, you actually had to
have a piano player, or a keyboardist. You had to have a drummer,
I mean, a real drummer, traps. Maybe a bass guitar in the rhythm section
or real guitar in the rhythm section. And then after the basic rhythm
tracks were done, you had something that was called, and
is still called today, sweetening. Horns and strings. Individual players that played real
instruments that had to come in the studio to lay the tracks to
complete the recording. In addition to that, most artists didn't have the money
to manufacture their records. They relied on the major record labels,
not major record labels but a record label, independent record
label at that time as well, to pay for the cost of manufacturing. And they certainly didn't
have the distribution system when it was strictly a physical market. That was one of the ways that the labels
had a stranglehold on the artist. In order to reach the market, pretty much, you had to go through a label's
distribution relationship. But a number of things have changed
over the past 40, 50 years. Well, how have they changed? Well, now do you really have to
pay recording costs for a studio? Many artists have studios in their
bedrooms, in their basements. Maybe even in their kitchens or bathrooms. Do you have to have an engineer? A lot of the engineering
can be done on your laptop. Do you have to manufacture
a CD to be released? No, you can upload the file to
SoundCloud or many of the other types of internet outlets
that can be used today. What about marketing? Record labels also provided marketing that
the artist couldn't afford years ago. Well, the marketing costs have been
decreased as a result of social media outlets in creating viral videos,
even, YouTube, create tremendous, tremendous marketing
and promotion for the artist. So in other words, maybe it really isn't
necessary to have a record label today. Once again, entrepreneurship and
innovation. So if you have the talent to be able to
record yourself and put together all of the pieces of the recording, you could be
in a great position to be in business. I remember Stevie Wonder years
ago was one of the first artists to play all of the instruments
as synthesizers came in. And it was really remarkable during that
time because artists were looking at the fact that they had to bring in
various session musicians to play. But when the synclavier came in,
drum machines came in, Stevie was one of the first artists to record all of
the music on his own, and that kind of set the music industry on a path of people
being able to create their music in a very low-cost fashion using all of
these new technological advancements. So where are we now? We're in the age of DIY. Do it yourself. Can you create that product on your own? Maybe you can. Can you exploit all the various social
media outlets to really create a hype, create a great YouTube video
that's gonna really maximize your exposure to the audience
that you wanna have? Are you gonna be in a position not
only to create that initial hype, and develop that initial audience, but are you
gonna be able to develop that audience, and expand it to the next level? That's primarily what the major
labels are still saying to this day. That wait a minute. When you really wanna reach
the broadest market, come to us. That's what we do. We can take you from
this level to the next. And many DIY artist
are feeling that pressure once they have that initial
audience reception and success. Whether or not they should go to
the next level with the major labels. Or if they should continue to
try to do it yourself, DIY. Well, here's the difficulty with DIY. In order for you to get from
that one level to the next, I say it's very hard to do it yourself. It's very hard to have a DIY broad, mass exposure, worldwide exposure. Why? Cuz if you're involved in the creative
process, and you're writing your songs and you're recording your songs, and
you're into that creative groove, it's kind of tough to have to turn that off and
get on Twitter and put a post and update. Cut a YouTube video and post that and
monitor it to see where it's really trending, and whether or
not you're trending. It can take away from
the creative process. A lot of DIY musicians are now finding,
in order, and I anticipate DIY artists will get
to the point that they're going to find out that they need other people
to help them get to that next level. In other words, it's not DIY,
it will be DIO. Do it ourselves. And by that I mean they can point to
someone who's a music business major and has the business experience to help
in the management of what they're doing. They can find someone that's
expert in social media and bring them into their team to
help them expand their career. They can find someone who has
contacts with sponsorships and endorsements to help them to attract needed financing for
them to pursue other ventures. On behalf of not only those companies but
maybe their own ventures, their own products. So I think we're moving into
a stage of not just DIY. I think we're moving
to a new stage of DIO. Do it ourselves. I think it's important for new artists
that have the ability to do this. To surround themselves with the kind
of team of professionals and experts, in a vast number of areas. To take their music and, most importantly,
their business, to the next level. You might be an engineer. And trust me, powerful product
is still one of the big P's. They're going to need people that
can put and mix the recordings so that it stands up over time. You might be an expert in social media. Artists are going to need great people
to help them navigate the Internet and the marketing and
promotion through those means. If you're a songwriter, if you're a musician who can provide
services in the studio as well. A manager, someone who can coordinate all
these activities on behalf of the artist. Someone who could track down and
arrange sponsorships and endorsements. Maybe you can create a new tech app that's gonna provide some kind of
benefit to expand the artist's career. All of these vast areas and opportunities
are only gonna grow as more and more people take advantage of the new
technology and the new digital age.