So let's talk about
the history of copyright, the history of copyright
in the United States. As I indicated, the initial
Copyright Act was enacted in 1790. Very interesting that our founders
during this age of enlightenment decided that they wanted to create a mechanism
where Americans could create works. They wanted to encourage
people to create works. Inventions, patents, creative works. Write books, write music, that they
could own for a certain period of time. It was very important during that period
of time because, the development of the printing press was very important to
the economic engine of the United States. And they want to encourage more Americans
to write books than the offshore, copyrighted books from England. And Europe. Over this period of time since 1790, there have been a number of amendments
to the Copyright Act that affect the term of the copyright or the length
of the ownership of the copyright. Royalty Rates, types, and
rights of copyrights. So let's talk about the term of copyright. In 1790, in the original Copyright Act,
the term of copyright was only 14 years. In other words,
if someone created a work and filed with the US Copyright Office,
they would have the exclusive rights and a monopoly on the rights to that work for
14 years. And at the end of that 14 year period,
and the end of a term of copyright, the work then falls into what
is called Public Domain, which means anyone in the public can use
that work without getting the permission of the original copyright owner or
anyone else for that matter. Now over the course of this 220-plus
year history of the Copyright Act, there have been a number of amendments,
particularly to the term of copyright. And currently the term of copyright
is the life of the author plus 70 years,
unless the work is a work for hire. And you might be saying,
what in the world is a work for hire? Well, a work for hire is when a
corporation hires someone to create a work within their scope of employment,
or if the work falls in one of nine categories of types of works
that can be considered a work for hire. If that happens then the corporation not the creator of the work is
considered the author of the work. And the corporation will own the work for
95 years. Now I mentioned that current term
of copyright if it isn't a work for hire is life plus 70 years. Well what happens if you have
more than one author of the work? Well if you have more than
one author of the work, that 70 year period doesn't run until
the death of the last surviving author. I have a perfect example for that. My client, Gerald Levert,
the late great Gerald Levert wrote songs with a co
writer who was still alive. Gerald unfortunately died in 2006. But his co writer on a number
of his songs is still alive. Let's say that the co
writer lives til 2035. Well the 70 year period
doesn't start to run until after the last
surviving author passes. So when he passes,
that 70 year period will run. Which means that his estate,
along with Gerald's estate, would own the copyrights in all of
those songs until the year 2105. So you see the importance of the length of
copyright, and one of the reasons I say the copyright is one of the most
valuable assets in the music industry. If you're a student outside
of the United States. Please recognize that each country
has its own copyright law. And those laws might be different
from the laws of the United States. So be sure to consider
the copyright laws of your nation. The Copyright Act has also been amended to increase the amount
of mechanical royalties. Payed to the owners of
the copyright in the composition. You'll recall back in lesson one,
I mentioned how song writers and publishers became very concerned when
the first form of mechanical reproduction of their songs, the piano roll,
came out in the early 1900s. As a result of that the piano roll makers
had to pay the owners of the copyright and the composition, the songwriters and
publishers a two cent royalty for each copy of the piano roll that was sold. Over the years, that mechanical royalty
rate has increased to the current rate of 9.1 cents per copy for
recordings less than five minutes, or $0.0175 per minute for
recordings in excess of five minutes. Books and songs were the primary form of
copyrights protected by the Copyright Act until 1972 when Congress created
a new type of copyright. The sound recording, the sound recording. The sound recording copyright
has to be differentiated from the copyright in the composition,
and let's talk about that right now. You'll recall at the beginning of this
lesson I sang the hook to the song, If I was Down and Out,
the very first song I wrote. Well, after coming up with
that hook I went home and I wrote the verses, I wrote a bridge,
and I put together a complete song. I was unaware at that time, that's
why it's so important for you to take this course, so you can be aware of
the importance of protecting your work. I could've copy written that song. The basic music and the lyrics. And to do that I would have
had to file what is called the Performing Arts Registration, or a PA
Registration, which protects just that. The music and the lyrics,
the basic music and lyrics to the song. So let's call that the PA Registration. The copyright in the composition. Well, the sound recording copyright is different from the copyright
in the composition. The Sound Recording Copyright
protects the fixation of sounds that make up
a recording of the composition. The fixation of sound, of course, is gonna include all of the various
instruments, all of the vocals, all of the mixing that's done to
create that specific recording. And Congress wanted to make
sure that record companies and artists were protected from other
people making exact duplicates. Of those actual recordings. So they passed the Sound Recording
Copyright amendment to the Copyright Act. So usually the owners of the rights and the composition are the songwriters and
the publishers. The publishers are people that actually
exploit the music, exploit the songs. Try to get the songs used in as many ways
as possible in order to generate income. Usually artists assign their rights and artists do have rights
in the sound recordings. Because when they're creating
that work in the studio, the inflections in their voice is
a creative work, are creative works. And they assign those copyright interest
over to the record companies and the record companies of course
exploit the recordings for them. So you heard me sing the song
If I Was Down And Out. I made a sound recording
of that song as well. So I could of had or filed a PA
registration for that composition. And I've also could of filed
a SR form which stands for sound recording to protect my
rights in the sound recording. I'm going to let you listen to
a little bit of the sound recording. [MUSIC] That's my group that I performed with. [MUSIC] Yes, that is me with a five inch afro,
It was the 70s. [MUSIC] So there's two types of copyrights that
are very important to the musician, to both the song writer and the artist. The copyright in a composition which is
protected by filing the performing arts or PA type of registration. And the sound recording which is protected
by filing in SR type of registration. The sound recording copyright also allows
you to protect not only the fixation of sounds on on that particular recording. But it also enables you to protect
any artwork that's on the CD or album, or any liner notes,
the entire package. Or the artwork or creative work that goes
into that sound recording can be protected with the SR registration. And under US copyright law you can protect both the composition and
the sound recording by filing a sound recording copyright and indicating and
checking the box that you own all of the rights in the composition
that's on the recording as well. And that way you can protect
both the composition and the sound recording under the sound
recording copyright form. Once again, you have to own all of
the rights in the composition and the sound recording to be
able to do that on one form. In 1976, Congress amended the Copyright
Act to include a brand new right, that would be of benefit
to songwriters and artists. This right gives authors of non work for
hire works created after 1978, the rights to recapture the transfer and
assignments of those copyright interests 35 years
after the original assignment. You'll recall earlier I
mentioned how most songwriters assign their interest in
copyrights to publishers. And in today's market Most publishers
offer songwriters what are called co-publishing and administration deals
where the publishers take care of all of the administrative aspects of
exploiting the composition on behalf of the songwriters in exchange for
receiving 25% of the income. Well recording artist as well
transfer their copyright interest to record companies. And as I mentioned earlier,
record companies usually pay royalties of 13 to 16% for
the sale of the recordings and usually 50% for
any other use of the recordings. Well you can see how this
is such an important right. As 35 years after 1978,
it's beginning of 2013. And at the beginning of this year,
a number of songwriters and artists reclaimed and recaptured their copyright interest
that they transferred back in 1978. And as a result, now they can receive
100% of the income instead of giving up 25% to the publisher, or
84 to 87% to the record company, or the 50% that they normally give up to
record companies for other types of uses. Another new right was
created in copyright in 1995, when the Digital Performance Right
in Sound Recording Act was passed. Giving the copyright owners of the sound
recording, the record companies and artists, payments for any digital
transmission of their copyrights. So what does that mean? That means that the owner of the sound
recording, the record companies and artists now get paid
anytime those recordings are played through digital
types of transmissions. Digital transmissions include Cable TV,
Radio Channels. Internet channels. Satellite radio. XM Sirius are all digital transmissions. While owners in the copyrights and
compositions, publishers and songwriters get paid when their songs
are performed on terrestrial radio through performance rights organizations. The owners in the copyright and
the sound recording record companies and artists historically have not. While that's true the Digital Performance
Rights and Sound Recordings Act of 1995 did create a new revenue stream for
record companies and artists to be paid. Record companies and artists for years
have been complaining about the fact that they don't get paid when their recordings
are played on terrestrial radio. And have in fact been lobbying Congress
for legislation to make that happen. Well, they haven't been
successful in this effort but at least the 1995
Digital Performance Right and Sound Recording Act is
giving record companies and artists the opportunity to be paid
when their recordings are streamed and played through this growing
digital transmission market.