All right, let's talk about another
position that's of crucial concern to the artist, and
that is the royalty provision. The artist assigns their copyright to
the record company and in exchange for that assignment,
they receive royalties from various uses of those sound recordings. This provision, like all of the provisions
have evolved over a period of time and continue to evolve. Let's talk about the royalties for
the various uses of the sound recordings. One of the uses of sound recordings
is the sale of the recording. The sale through digital distribution,
the sale of physical CDs. And the royalty rates for physical recordings are couched
in terms of percentage points. In other words one percent
is considered one point. The norm for royalty rates for new
artists for albums is between 13 and 16%. Now many contracts will have provisions
stating that royalty rates for singles are three quarters of
the album rate, which means, if you have a 16% royalty,
your royalty for singles might be 12%. I, personally, have problems with that,
but we're going to talk about it, particularly for digital singles, but
we'll talk about that a little later. 13 to 16% is a good royalty rate for
new artists in today's market. But the question arises,
13 and 16% of what? What does that 13 or 16% apply to? Let's say you have a 15 point deal. Well, this gets back into
the evolution of recording agreements. In years past, some major labels would
apply that percentage to the retail price. And some labels will apply
it to the wholesale price. Now what is the wholesale price? Record companies create
configurations of sound recordings, say a cd is a configuration
of a sound recording. Multiple sound recordings are on a cd. They sell those to retailers for what
is called the wholesale price, which is usually a few dollars less than the price
that the retailer sells to the consumer. Record companies generally,
particularly in the past in physical distribution days,
did not sell to the public. They sold their records to retailers
who sold their records to the public. Well, when record companies would base
their calculation of royalties on retail prices, it usually caused confusion. And here's the situation. Record companies suggest
retail list prices. To retailers to sell the product for. In other words, years ago,
lets go back to the 90s. A Jay-Z album could come out and
the record company, although it would sell the album
to the retailer for $12, they would suggest that
the album be sold for 15.98. That was the retail,
the suggested retail list price. Sometimes called the SRLP,
The Suggested Retail List Price. And that's the price that
the record company's suggest the retailers sell it for. Retailers don't have to sell it for
that price. The retailers could sell it for $14. And they could determine
their extent of profit. They paid $12 for it, they could sell
it for $12.98 and make a dollar. They could sell it for $14.98 and
make a greater profit. So it really depends on what
the retailer sold it for. But that suggested retailer's price
would be the initial price for determining how that royalty
rate would be applied. And here's where it creates
a lot of confusion. In the early part of the contract,
the royalty provision would say that the royalty rate would be applied
to the retail royalty base price. Artists would assume that to be
the Suggested Retail List Price, in this case $15.98 or $16. But further on in the contract, there would be a provision defining
what the retail royalty base price is, and that wouldn't be
the Suggested Retail List Price. There would be certain deductions taken
from that suggested retail list price, before that royalty rate was applied. And we're going to talk about some
deductions that are taken from artists' royalties that really create confusion,
lead to non-transparency, and have really evolved over a period of time. So the definition of
the retail royalty base price would state that it is
the suggested retail list price minus a packaging deduction. A packaging deduction. What is a packaging deduction? Well, record companies years ago
really felt that the artwork on the album, which they paid for
artists to create, really created value in
the sale of the product. And they didn't want to pay the artist
a royalty based on the artwork. They only want to pay the artist
a royalty for the music. So they felt that from that
suggested retail list price, they should take a certain amount off
of that, to account for them paying for the artwork that helped sell the album. Here's the problem. At first, for vinyl albums,
the packaging deduction was 15%. And once again, this goes into
the evolution of technology. Each time a new technology,
a new configuration was introduced to the marketplace, it seemed that the
packaging deduction went up more and more. So when cassettes came into the
marketplace, the packaging deduction for cassettes was 20%. And then in the 80's, the packaging deduction was 25%. So what does this all mean,
let's go back to our example with Jay-Z. Suggested retail list price
back in the 90s might have been $15.98, $16,
that was the suggest list price. The retail royalty based
price however Included a 25% deduction from that $16 price. Which reduced that royalty
base price from $16 to $12. It's kind of discounting
the artist's royalties so that the record company
has to pay less for that. How much did it cost for record
companies to not only manufacture, but package and seal CDs? They took four dollars off
with the packaging deduction, sometimes called a container deduction,
but the record company only spent 60 to 75
cents, not only to manufacturer it, but package it, seal wrap the CD,
60 to 75 cents. But they've taken a deduction of
four dollars off the suggested retailer's price to get to
the retail wall-to-base price. Very confusing. Non-transparent. That's what artists
were complaining about. Unfortunately, you find a lot of
contracts that are still couched in terms of the retail price today. However, royalties for major labels
aren't calculated on the retail price, they're calculated on the wholesale price. What is the wholesale price? The wholesale price is sometimes called
the published price per dealer or PPD. So let's take an example here. Let's say that currently
an album sells through Itunes for $9.99, and
the record company gets paid $7.50. They sell it to Itunes for $7.50. Well if you apply the royalty
rate of 15% for that album, you will find that that leaves the artist
with a royalty of about $1.12 per album. When you talk about singles,
it could be a different story. I mentioned earlier, traditionally,
single's royalty rates, many times, are only three-quarters
of the album royalty rate. So, to make it easy, if you had 16-point
deal for albums, you would have a 12 point deal for singles, but that's the historic
way of paying royalties of singles. That was back in the day where
CD singles were released, record companies had to pay a lot of
money to produce these CD singles, to distribute them to wholesalers,
and wholesalers who sold to retailers, there was a lot involved, a big
investment for the release of cd singles. But since 2003 the primary configuration
of singles has not been the cd. It's been the digital download. Now what are the costs
to the record company to deliver these files to iTunes,
to Amazon? Their not producing a CD. They're not having to distribute it,
and have warehouses to distribute it. They don't have all of
those multiple costs. So should the royalty rate be less for a
digital single, then for a digital album? I argue, no. And although your contract might have the
original proposal from the record company stating that they want to pay
you a three quarter rate, I've found that if you
really press the issue, the record companies will possibly agree
to pay the album rate for digital singles. Why is that important? Singles are becoming a huge
selling configuration for records. And you've got many multiple million
selling singles in today's market. So the single is becoming important again
just like it was back in the fifties, sixties, and seventies. So the packaging deduction
created confusion, particularly when you deal with royalties
being paid on the retail list price. And once again, some contracts you'll find
out there today still state that they're paying royalties on a retail list price
and will impose a packaging deduction, but there are other deductions that
you need to be concerned about.