The Packaging Deduction, the Breakage
Deduction, the Free Goods Deduction. I am gonna deal with one other deduction
that's significant to artists as far as the payment of royalties and
when their royalties are paid, and it is a Reserve Deduction,
a deduction for reserves. What are reserves? Well, let's talk about the process,
particularly in the physical CD world. Record companies sell CDs to
retailers on a consignment basis. In other words, if those retailers don't
sell those CDs, they have the right to return those CDs to the record company for
credit to buy other CDs. In other words, when a record company
sends out and sells a particular CD, they can send out 1,000 copies. They don't know if the retailer
is gonna sell 1,000, suppose they only sell 600 out
of the 1,000 for the artist. Now they may not know for two years, those records could stay in the store for
two years, they may not know for two years actually how many of those,
of that particular CD that they sold. So theoretically, the record company has
to account to the artist in six months, saying that they sold 1,000 CDs,
and pay royalties for 1,000 CDs. And this is where it gets a little tricky. Record companies will say, alright, I'm gonna show you what your
royalties are for selling 1,000 CDs. And this is the amount of royalties
that we owe you for selling 1,000 CDs. However, the record company is
gonna hold a certain percentage of those royalties in reserve for returns. So let's take an example of that. Let's say that they've
shipped 1,000 albums, and if you're a 15 point artist,
and the CDs have sold for the PPD, or wholesale price, of $7.50,
you earn about $1.12 a record. Your royalties would be about $1,100. But, the reserve provision says that they
can withhold 25% of those royalties, in other words, about 250, 260 dollars,
for a certain period of time, up to two years, to determine whether or
not they're gonna get any returns on those, now here's the good thing about
reserves, if you sell off 1,000, they will eventually account to you for
the amounts that they've held in reserve. It usually happens two
years after the fact, but at least if you're selling,
you're going to get that amount. All right, so let's kind of
summarize what we talked about. Royalties based on sale of recordings, usually that's done by
applying a royalty rate. The royalty rate could
be between 13 to 16% of either the retail price,
in some contracts, or the wholesale price, particularly in relation to
major label contracts, and there are certain deductions or
discounts taken from the royalties. What are the discounts
that we talked about? The Packaging Deduction,
the Breakage Deduction, the Free Goods Deduction, Reserves. Now let's talk about how
recording contracts are evolving as we move into the digital age. Are those deductions relevant? The same same deductions that were taken
for physical copies of recordings, CDs, are they relevant to what's
happening in the digital age? Well I would say that there's concern,
regarding whether or not they're relevant. Certainly the packaging deduction. Is there any packaging? For a digital album, yes, they do do
artwork, but there's no package for a digital download. As a matter of fact, at the turn of
the century, as digital download were just starting to develop, not at
the turn of the century, 2003, 2004, I had a conversation with a business affairs
person [LAUGH] at a major record label, because I saw a packaging deduction,
in regards to digital downloads. [LAUGH] I started laughing on the phone. I said, wait a minute. Wait a minute. You have a packaging deduction for
digital download? How do you have a package,
that's ridiculous. And she said, well, you know,
once again, these are our policies and we have to have that and there,
let me make it up to you in another way. Packaging deductions clearly aren't
relevant to digital downloads and contracts have evolved over
the past ten years to remove that. Breakage deduction, once again, major
labels don't apply the breakage deduction. However, you might have
an independent company or even your production company that you sign with that
might release your product on iTunes. And if they have a breakage deduction
in there, you're gonna get paid on a lesser number than the albums or
singles that were actually sold. So you really need to watch that. Can there be any breakage
of a digital download? Absolutely not. The records are delivered in digital
fashion to the digital distributor, and as they're sold, they come off their servers
to the purchaser, doesn't make sense. [LAUGH] There's no breakage
deduction in the digital world. What about free goods? In the physical worlds, yes. Record companies did have to entice
retailers to buy more copies by possibly giving them a few for free. Once again, in a digital world, the file
is delivered to iTunes, to Amazon. When they're sold,
the retailer or iTunes or Amazon isn't giving any free copies. And what about reserves? The same argument. The file is delivered to
the digital distributor, who sells it directly to the consumer. There's no return of digital downloads. The digital distributor only accounts for
the number that they actually sell. There's no reason for
there to be any reserve provision. So once again, it isn't rocket science,
but it is important if you're an artist to be aware of these provisions, so
that you can negotiate them in your favor. And if you're a record company owner in
this new digital age, recognize that these are provisions that may not be relevant
any more and you want to have a fair and equitable contract with the artist to
move forward to develop your business.