Another important provision of
the recording artist agreement is the provision dealing with advances. What are advances? Well, advances are advanced
payment of royalties, and record companies advance royalties for
a number of reasons. Primarily, to record the album,
and many times, the advances of certain dollar amount will
be paid as an advance to produce an album. Those are called Album Fund Advances,
which means all of the costs of recording the albums have to be taken
out of that particular advance. On a major label level,
a new artist might receive an Album Fund Advance
of 50 to $100,000.00. For a mid-level artist,
it might be 100 to $200,000.00. In the case of superstar artists, they might receive an Album Fund Advance
of 300 to $1,000,000.00. Now, independent labels also
might pay an advance, but they're gonna be much smaller because
they sell in smaller numbers. It can range from $2,500 for
an album up to 25,000 depending on the genre of music
that you're talking about. Album Fund Advances are paid to offset
the cost of recording the album. That means paying for recording costs,
paying for the recording studios, paying producers, arrangers, engineers. A part of the fund might be used for
personal expenses of the artist. So, let's say a new artist
has a $100,000 album fund. Out of that, the record company might designate $20,000
to be a personal advance to the artist. And the rest of the $80,000 is held
in reserve to be used to pay all of the recording cost. And in an album fund basis, if there's
anything left after the payment of all of the recording costs,
that will also go to the artist. So, the artist might have
a designated $20,000, $80,000 for the recording costs, but if the recording
costs only come to $60,000, that's an additional $20,000 leftover
that might also go to the artist. So, the artist might end
up receiving $40,000. All right, but let's look at the instance
where the recording costs go over budget. Instead of 80,000, they need $90,000. Well, usually the artist then
has to pay that difference or the record company has the right
to terminate the contract. So, it's very important for artists to
stay within their recording budget. And here's the next very important point. All advances are recouped
from the artist royalties. Now, many people think that the record
company is loaning money to the artist to record their album. Well, it isn't a loan. It's a big difference between
an advance and a loan. Why?
In a loan with a bank, if you buy a house, the bank is gonna give you a mortgage, and they're gonna secure
it against that house. If you don't pay the money back,
the bank can sue you, personally. They can go after your bank accounts. They can sell your car. They can sell the house
to get that money back. That isn't the case in
a recording agreement, where advances are made to the artist. The only way the record company can
recoup that investment is to sell more records because that is only
recoupable from the artist royalties. If the artist doesn't generate enough
in royalties to pay that back, then the record company
has to live with that. They can't pursue the artist
personally for unrecouped royalties. I was told when I first started
practicing law that it's important to get as big of
an advance on royalties as possible. And at that time, people told me that
if you don't get the money upfront, it's unlikely that you're going
to see it on the backend. And as time went on and
over the past 20 or 30 years, I've really seen that to be the case. It's more important now than ever for artists to try to get an advance
upfront because unfortunately, it's unlikely that they're gonna be in
a position of recouping all of the cost. Why do I say that? Well, in addition to the Album Fund
Advances to produce the album, over the course of the last 20 or
30 years, record companies have added other costs that they consider to
be advances against the artist royalties. What are those costs? One, are video cost,
the cost of producing videos, are considered advances
against the artist royalties. If your contract is well
negotiated by your attorney, only 50% of video costs will be
recoupable from your artist royalties. 50% of your video costs
recoupable from artist royalties. Companies will try to recoup 100%, but
sometimes, if you fight them on that point, they will agree to only
recoup 50% of the video cost. Why is that important? Well, it's very important because
videos are pretty expensive. At one time, back in the 90s,
some of the top video producers would charge $1,000,000 in
a fund to produce one video. Now, those costs have come
down dramatically now, but a good video is probably at least
gonna cost you $50,000 or more. And you'll find for each album,
artists will produce maybe three or four videos for three or four singles. So, those video costs can be substantial. So, video costs are now
recoupable from artist royalties. Here's another point. Independent promotion costs. Independent promotion costs are also
recoupable from artist royalties. What are independent promotion costs? Well, independent promoters
are people that have special relationships with radio programmers. And although the internet is
really taking off, and YouTube and viral sensations are creating a new
wave of promotion in the music industry, radio, terrestrial radio is still a very,
very important part of the promotion mix. So, it's very important for record companies to be able to hire
these independent promoters who have special relationships with radio
programmers to have the singles played. The cost of paying these independent
promoters is pretty substantial. It can range anywhere from
$50,000 to $300,000 per single. So, that's a very expensive cost. Let's say it's $50,000 per single, and let's say that an artist has
a video that costs $50,000. Usually, independent promotion cost,
if you press the record company, can be recouped only at a 50% rate. So, you wanna try to get your video and
independent promotion cost recoupable at a 50% rate,
not a 100% rate. So, let's say that an artist has
four singles off of their album. They cut four videos at $50,000 each. For each single, an independent promoter
is hired at $50,000 per single. So, you have $400,000 in cost. Half of that is recoupable
from your artist royalties. Let's say,
the artist had a $100,000 recording fund. Well, you might have thought,
initially is that, all I have to do is recoup
$100,000 in cost for my recording fund, and
then I'm entitled to more royalties. But you have to also factor in the video
cost and the independent promotion cost. So, you've got another
200,000 on top of that. So, now you have $300,000
that you have to recoup. So, you can see,
it becomes pretty difficult for artists to be able to generate
royalties beyond that initial advance. But let's look at the instance of a small
independent label that you've signed with and
maybe your recording fund is only $25,000. And your video costs might be $2,500 per
video, and you might produce four videos, and the independent promotion
costs will be much smaller. They might be $2,500 per single as well. So, that's an additional $20,000 on
top of the $25,000 recording fund. Here's the thing with independent labels. Remember how I talked about sometimes
independent labels enter into 50, 50 profit sharing relationships
with their artist? But when they enter into that 50,
50 profit-sharing artist, they recoup all of the costs, not 50%
of the costs, like major labels do for video cost and
independent promotion costs. All of those costs have to be recouped
before you get to the 50, 50 split. So, in today's music industry,
it's kind of tough for an artist to ever be in a totally
recoup position, to be entitled to royalties beyond the initial advance,
and here's usually how it works. If you're unrecouped after the first
album, whether or not you're on a major label or independent label, but you sold
a significant number of copies, usually, the label is going to want to pick up the
option for the next album, at which point, you're entitled to an additional advance
for the production of that album. So, even though that unrecouped account
will transfer over to the second album, that's called cross-collateralization
from one album to the next, the artist still would have made money
from that advance for the second album. And most artists now generate
royalties through advances. And trust me, if you sold a significant
amount of albums for your first album, your attorney's gonna be on the line to
the business affairs person at the record company arguing for a renegotiated,
higher advance, for the second album. And that's why I say that it's important
to get as much as you can upfront. That theory is still true. It was true 30 years ago,
and it's still true today.