I have a theory. It's called the It Theory. What is It? Well, It is that x-factor. One, it's talent. Two, it's the ability to engage
an audience and hold their attention. There was a show on television
called the X Factor, that intangible factor that people have. Talent that can be developed into
something that can really allow an artist to have a career. So, I maintain that first, if you wanna
become an artist, you first have to have. It. You have to have it. You have to have the talent. I remember when I first
recognized that I had talent. I was managing a band called. It wasn't a band, it was really a vocal
group of four guys in high school. And the name of the group
was The Illusions. And one day they were trying to do a song
by The Temptations that had a great intro part by the great lead singer
David Ruffin where he started low in kind of a baritone voice and then
flipped into a falsetto and on one note. And it was a great part and
I remember everybody in the group tried to sing that part and they couldn't and
I went up and I said wait a minute fellas, this is it and I sang the part and
they all looked at me and they said, John you can't be
the manager you gotta be in the group. So I did in fact join that group. Now, it's important to recognize
that it isn't just about having it. You can have it but you wont become
successful unless you work it. In other words, you have to have it and
you have to work it. I'm gonna tell you my
experiences in working it. So the group The Illusions performed at
local events In my hometown of Cleveland, Ohio. We performed at rec centers,
we performed at high school talent shows, some organizations that had luncheons and
dinners asked us to come and perform, and we performed for free. We worked whenever we could. Then when I went to college, my roommate, who was a guitar player, and
I started a band called The Decade. We had maybe six or seven juniors, who were in their third year of college,
be a part of the band. We were the only Freshmen. And as we started to
really work in Syracuse, we only worked on
the Syracuse University campus. We played fraternity parties, sorority
parties, and that was the extent of it. The senior members of the group, the juniors who were in the group,
were really satisfied with that. But both me and my roommate,
the guitar player, really wanted to become successful
in the music industry, so when those guys graduated,
we decided to start a new band and we did. You saw a picture of the group
The New Decade earlier in the course. It was a vocal group but
it also had a band. We went on to do some recording but
we knew we had to work it. How did we work it? Well first we went off campus
to local Syracuse clubs. And we performed in the city of Syracuse. Word started to spread to other colleges,
to other clubs, in neighboring cities. And we worked the entire I90,
Interstate I90 corridor from Buffalo to clubs in Rochester,
Albany. Utica, New York. Rome, New York. As a result of that, we met bands who
had booking agents, who saw our band and they wanted to book us, and did. In the northeast United States
as well as Canada. We played in Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Toronto. In other words,
we were building up a network. We were working it. As a result of that work, I had the opportunity to meet
the leader of the group Cameo, who at that time, the name of the group
was the New York City Players. Larry Blackmon. We perform in the same towns. Sometimes we come to each other's shows to
check out what we were doing to see how we could improve. As a result of that connection,
as a result of that networking, in working it, when I moved to New York,
the first telephone call that I made was to Larry Blackmon
of the New York City Players. And my goal was to really
record with a group or an act on a nationally distributed label. And as a result of working it with
The Decade, with The New Decade, developing that network, I was in the
studio the first night in New York City doing demos for the recording that
we recorded about a month later. I achieved my goal,
I made it in that respect that I really wanted to be on
a nationally distributed record. In other words, you have to have it. But you not only have to have it,
you have to work it. And I say that if you have it and
you work it, you can make it.