Personal managers and talent agents,
as I've indicated, have different roles. The job of the personal manager,
of course, is to advance the artist's career from one level to the next,
whereas the job of the talent agent is to procure employment
on behalf of the talent. Sometimes this can create some,
as Robin Thicke would say, blurred lines. And this is the reason why
the state of California wanted to be sure it was one of
the first states to enact legislation, requiring talent agents to
register with the state. In 1967, they enacted
the California Talent Agency Act, basically saying anyone that procured
employment on behalf of an artist or any other kind of talent, had to be
registered with the state of California. And then in 1978,
I think because of obvious instances of personal managers not being
registered as talent agents but procuring employment,
California decided to add personal managers also as a category
under the Talent Agency Act. In other words, if personal managers
procured employment on behalf of their talent, they also had to be registered
under the Talent Agency Act in California. Now if you're registered as a talent
agent in the state of California, the contracts with your artists or the talent that you represent
can only be two years long. And that's because any talent agent
registered with that state of California, must comply with union contracts. Now, the two primary unions for musicians
are, the American Federation of Musicians, and the American Federation
of Television and Radio Artists, of course ,the AF of M,
American Federation of Musicians, represents instrumentalists and
musicians primarily, whereas AFTRA, the American Federation of Television and
Radio Artists, represents vocalists. And their form contracts say that talent agents can only represent
those types of talents for two years. So if you're a registered talent
agent in the state of California, your contract can only last two years. Also if you're a talent agent,
your maximum commission can only be 10%,
however if you're a personal manager and register with the state of
California as a talent agent, that commission can 15% because
you're in a position of offering both the services of procuring employment
and advancing the artist's career. Now, that creates quite a problem
with most personal managers in the music business because
as we just talked about earlier, most personal managers want
a commission of at least 20% and a personal manager also wants
a contract that can last up to possibly a minimum of five years. A personal manager doesn't want
to get involved with the talent, working with the talent,
identifying producers and studios, and
trying to get a recording agreement and a publishing agreement, which might
take two years to actually happen, only to have the act, at that point,
sign with another personal manager, and they lose the investment that they've
made over those past two years. So, the result is, most personal managers do not register as
talent agents in the state of California. Most personal managers don't register
as talent agents in the state, and I mean personal managers, not that just
live in the state of California, but also managers that live in other states,
even in other countries because if you have a talent that becomes
successful in entertainment, sooner or later, they're gonna go to
the entertainment capital of Los Angeles. They're gonna perform on TV shows, they're gonna perform possibly in movies,
they're gonna have other activities and stuff, they might record
in the state of California. Many artists, once they become successful,
rent condos or even buy houses in
the state of California. And once that happens, once they have
significant context with the state of California, then they fall under
the jurisdiction of California law. So even if I'm a manager say in my home
state of Ohio, and I'm originally from Cleveland, Ohio, about an hour away from
Cleveland is a city called Akron, Ohio. And I'm just showing you
how real this could be. There was an actor, drummer, and a guitar
player, and singer, that put together a great band that became very
successful from Akron, The Black Keys. Suppose I was their manager
early in their career and I was trying to book
them across the country. I decided that I wasn't gonna register as
a talent agent in the state of California or any place else, for that matter. I'm strictly the manager,
trying to advance their career, and as a part of that, I decided that I was
gonna try to book some dates in the state of California, and did, in fact,
before they became famous. Well, once they become famous, at that
point, if there's ever a problem between the artist and the manager,
the artist might use the fact that I booked dates for
them in the state of California against me because if I am not a registered talent
agent in the state of California, that artist could file a complaint against
me with the California Labor Commissioner that oversees enforcement of
the California Talent Agency Act. And in that complaint, they can allege
that I was an unregistered talent agent but I booked engagements for them in the state of California,
in violation of that act. There's very serious ramifications
from the filing of a complaint with the California Labor Commissioner,
because the California Labor Commissioner can order a hearing on that and
if they determine that I, in fact, procured employment in the state
of California, and I was an unregistered talent agent, the Labor Commissioner
can make two findings, one, order that the contract between me and
the talent is terminated. And two, order me to pay all
of the back commissions that I might have earned up to that point
to the talent, to the artist. A lot of people aren't aware of
that act and it's very important. When I first got involved, my very first
case when I first started practicing law, was with The O'Jays. And at that time, The O'Jays were
huge stars and they had fired their manager a couple of years before
they had stopped paying him commission. And at some point, the manager felt
that the agreement was still in force. So, he sued The O'Jays for $100,000 and
that was a lot of money back then. And of course, I'm a young law student,
and my childhood idols, The O'Jays, gave me this case and I was thrilled,
but scared, of course. And all I could do was apply what I'd
learned in law school, and that is to go to the law library and research
the case, and that's exactly what I did. Once again, this is in 1980,
the California Talent Agency Act had only added personal managers to be
considered as talent agents in 1978. And as I researched I found that law, and it said that if a personal manager
does not register as a talent agent, and they procure employment
in the state of California, they are violating
the California Talent Agency Act. So, I called a California attorney and
made him aware of the circumstances. First, of course, I had to speak
with my clients, The O'Jays, and I sat down with them one day,
one of the members, and I said, did this manager ever get any gigs for
you over the past few years? And he said, yeah, you know, there was
a time or two or three years ago that he came to us and he said, you know,
I've got this tour in California for you. You know, I've got dates in Stockton and
Sacramento, you'll do San Diego, and,
of course, you'll do LA and Oakland. And, this is the problem with personal
managers, they always like to take credit for
getting work for the artists. So they're more than happy to say,
I got this for you. Never did he know that that
would come to haunt him. Because once I got that information and
shared it with the California attorney, we strategized that we would prepare
a complaint with the Labor Commissioner against their manager, alleging that
he violated the Talent Agency Act by procuring employment without
being a registered talent agent. And we decided we'd send a copy
of the complaint to the manager, just to let him know, look, we're
gonna file this complaint against you. We found that you violated this act. As soon as we sent the complaint to him,
without even filing it with the Labor Commissioner,
the manager dropped the lawsuit and, of course, I loved it, a new lawyer and I
came up with something for The O'Jays and the The O'Jays, something that really
helped The O'Jays, and they were able to say wow, this young lawyer, maybe he's,
maybe he can do a pretty decent job. So that's how I first became aware of this
Talent Agency Act and surprisingly folks, that was many years ago. To this day, many personal
managers are unaware of that act. And many personal managers have
been caught in the web of procuring employment on behalf of their clients
in the state of California and violating that act because they
weren't registered talent agents. I'll give one other example. In the early '90s, Arsenio Hall, who was also from my hometown
of Cleveland, Ohio, had a talk show, evening talk show,
that became very successful overnight, and after the first two years,
his manager went in to the network and renegotiated an extension of
his contract and renegotiated, and then came back to Arsenio Hall and
said, Arsenio, look, I renegotiated this agreement,
and this is what you're gonna get. And Arsenio didn't ask him to do that. And he said, well wait a minute,
I didn't ask you to do that. I might have, you know,
I wanted to be included in that. In other words, he was upset
with his manager for doing that. And he filed a complaint
with the Labor Commissioner, basically alleging that his manager,
who was not a registered talent agent, had procured this extension of his
contract without his permission. They went through a hearing and the Labor
Commissioner did find that his manager was an unregistered talent agent and had
procured employment in violation of that act, terminated the contract, and
ordered the manager to pay 2.5, I think it was $2.5 million in
back commission to Arsenio Hall. Now you would think with that
happening in the early '90s, managers would still be aware of that. Well, there has been case
after case since then, where managers have gone in and procured
employment on behalf of their talents. And they weren't registered
as talent agents. And so, the lesson here is if
you are a personal manager, don't procure employment
in the state of California. Make sure that your artist has a talent
agent to perform those services. Now you're certainly gonna be in a
position that Shelley Berger was to screen the types of engagements that the talent
agent procures, but your job is to determine which of those engagements
are the best ones for them to take. But you can't be involved in the
solicitation and the negotiation of that. Now, that law has had some
changes over the years. I think currently, it is allowable for managers, at least,
to reach out to record companies and publishing companies and
talk about doing a potential deal. But for the most part, that has to be incidental to what they're
doing otherwise, in other words, there can't be a significant amount of procuring
employment in the state of California. Also, they have a similar law
in the state of New York, but that law is a little
more lax in enforcement. It does allow a manager to procure
employment, just so long as those services are incidental to the other duties that
the personal manager is performing.