Talent agents, sometimes called
booking agents, seek employment for their clients, and are regulated by
the states in which they do business. States, many years ago,
recognized that talent agents really do have to be screened and
registered, and there are registration processes for
agents in various states. This is a result of years of abuse
by sometimes people involved in criminal activity being talent agents, and really not accounting for the money that
they might have taken on deposit for a performing act to perform
a specific live performance. It really created problems, and states decided that they really need to
impose regulations to make sure that they screened the people that wanted to
be talent agents, force them to open up a separate escrow account to put
the deposits for the live performances in, that no one can touch until
the act actually performed a date. At which time the talent agents could
then take out their commission and pay the balance to the artist. So they're very heavily
regulated in states. Talent or booking agents
are in the full-time business of procuring employment for their clients. In other words, they are soliciting gigs, trying to negotiate gigs,
signing contracts to make sure the talent fulfills the terms of the jobs
that they procure for them. The agent is a middle person between
the talent and the talent buyers, sometimes a producer of a television show,
a live promoter, a night club. And it's important for that agent to
both recognize the value of the artist, as well as what that talent
buyer is willing to pay, and that's basically what the agent does. They procure, they solicit that
employment for the artist, negotiate an agreement that brings these
two parties together to make money. The talent agency business
is a tough business but it could be a very prosperous and
good business for you, just so long as you comply with
the regulations in your state. You can start your business small. You can book acts in local clubs,
possibly as opening acts for national acts, and
then you could start booking regionally. At some point you might grow
into a national agency. Unlike recording agreements and
personal management agreements, sometimes acts enter into
non-exclusive deals with agents. Clearly, agents don't
like these kind of deals. They want to be the exclusive
representative of the talent. They don't wanna have any other
agents undercutting the price that they might offer to a promoter. But it depends on the leverage of the act. And I have known some acts that will only
do non-exclusive deals with many agents. In other words, saying to the agents,
bring any gigs that you might be able to procure for me and I might take
it from you and pay a commission. In the case of an exclusive
written talent agency agreement, one of the provisions might be what
is called a Key Person Clause, a Key Person Clause. A Key Person Clause basically states
that there is one person in the agency that the artist is very close to and
is very concerned with them. The Key Person Clause says that,
should that person leave the agency, then the talent has the right
to terminate the contract. This provision is very important
in the talent agency business and many times you'll see agents leave
a particular talent agency, and take their clients with them. You might find a Key Person Clause also
in personal management agreements, particularly when a personal
manager that brought you on, that is really concerned
about your career, decides to leave the personal
management company that they're with. At that point,
if you have a Key Person Clause, that enables the act to get out of the
contract with that management agency and possibly follow the manager
to a new company.