Entertainment lawyers are also a very
important part of the artist team. Entertainment law is a very small field,
sometimes even encompasses sports law. You have many different organizations
that deal with both entertainment and sports law. However, entertainment
lawyers you'll usually find specialized in one or more areas. Usually music law, or TV and film law. Some entertainment lawyers, of course,
work in both of those areas but it's very important to find
experienced entertainment lawyers that work in the specific field that
you're involved in if you're a talent. This is really starting to cross
over into different areas right now as you have sports personalities
that are getting more involved. In music and film and vice versa, you have people in the music area
that are getting involved in sports. You have Jay-Z that just started
his own sports talent agency. So it's important to find people who
have experience in the specific areas that you need the help in. Entertainment law is also
a pretty small field, there's only a very few people that practice
this type of law on a full time basis. I consider myself to be very lucky to have
had the career I've had in this field. And it really requires the entertainment
lawyer to do much like I did, I was fortunate enough to find a great client at
the beginning of my career, the O'Jays. My career then grew as a result of that. There are two primary
types of entertainment lawyers that are really gonna work on
behalf of artists and their companies. One is the Litigation Attorney. A litigator is someone that tries cases,
usually in front of a judge or jury. In other words, they are court lawyers. I call them suit and tie lawyers. In other words, they're the lawyers
that file law suits, and try law suits. They go to court,
they appear in front of judges, try cases in front of juries and judges. Entertainment Litigators might be involved
in such actions as Copyright Infringement, Breach of Contract Suits. Litigators sometimes are paid on an hourly
basis, and most experienced litigators, and entertainment lawyers in general,
can earn between $300 to $1,000 an hour. And an hourly rate will usually apply to
situations where clients are being sued, and the attorney has to
defend them in court, so they'll keep track of their hours and
bill them on an hourly basis. However in certain instances,
litigators might take a case on where a client has a claim against someone else,
when there's a potential of winning a money settlement, or
money judgement against another client. Someone might have
infringed on their rights. And in that instance, sometimes the
litigators will take the case on what is called a contingency fee basis. In a contingency fee agreement, the
attorney doesn't bill on an hourly basis, but they receive their money
contingent upon them winning the case on behalf of their client,
and they get paid instead on a certain percentage of whatever they
might recover on their clients behalf. In most situations litigators
will charge a third of whatever they receive if the matter is settled
prior to them filing a lawsuit in court. If they have to file a lawsuit, sometimes
the litigators will be paid a fee of 40% because once the lawsuit is filed
they have to put in a lot more time. They have to make court appearances,
they have to pursue discovery filing interrogatories and taking depositions,
so it can be a very lucrative field. The entertainment litigation
field is even smaller. Once again, there's just a very few
hundred people that practice that type of law on a full time basis. I happen to be the second
type of entertainment lawyer, that is the Transactions Attorney. What does a Transactions Attorney do? Well, we usually are involved
in negotiation of contracts, establishing business
organizations on behalf of clients, monitoring the contracts and
their business dealings to make sure that everything is handled
according to the contracts and the business deals that we worked so
hard to get our clients involved in. Transactions Attorneys may also
be paid on an hourly basis, and, at times, they can be paid
on a contingency fee basis. Many times, Transactions Attorneys will
have relationships with record companies and with publishing companies and
will do what is called a provider service, which is called Shopping. Or in other words, trying to shop a deal,
or try to get deal on behalf of their client, either a recording
contract or a publishing contract. And if that happens, many times the
attorneys will charge a percentage fee, usually that fee is 5% of whatever monies
are derived from that particular contract. It's important for you to know that
Attorneys also have a fiduciary obligation to their clients,
just as personal managers do. Attorneys are put in a position of trust. Their clients place their trust in them
to look out for their client's interest over their own and sometimes this can
create conflict of interest problems. Most State Bar Associations that regulate
attorneys prohibit attorneys from going into business with their clients, because
at some point there's the potential that the attorney's interest could
be adverse to that of their client. Conflict of interest issues can
also be raised when an attorney represents a group. Suppose a band of four people
come into my office and say Mr. Kellogg, we want you to represent us. At that point, I have to find
out what each band member does. What are the talents of each band member? And it can really create problems. You could have a lead singer
that is also songwriter. You can have a guitar player
that only plays guitar. A drummer that only plays drums. Another base player that might sing and might contribute with the lead
singer as far as writing songs. In other words,
they all have unique talents that need to be represented
possibly individually. And so, in that situation,
usually you have to advise clients that, when you represent the group,
at some point If there appears to be a conflict of
interest between any of the four of them, they need to go out and
hire their own individual attorney. It's important to recognize that lawyers just like personal managers are regulated
by the states in which they do business. The Supreme Court of
each state registers and regulates attorneys and
give them licenses to practice law. And that's the reason why
personal managers shouldn't necessarily be entertainment lawyers. I was told this years ago,
don't try to be a personal manager while you're still
licensed as a lawyer. Many times I have artists that come to me
and say, Mr. Kellogg will you manage me, and I say, no I'm not a manager,
I'm strictly an entertainment lawyer. Here's the problem. If you're acting in the capacity
as a personal manager and you're also an entertainment lawyer,
should your artist have a problem and feel that you have a conflict
of interest issue or that you breached your fiduciary
duty as a personal manager? They can file a complaint with the Supreme
Court of the state in which you're licensed as a lawyer, and that body,
the Supreme Court, could disbar you from practicing law if they found that you've
actually violated a fiduciary duty or you've created some kind of conflict
of interest with your artist. So you have to really
make decision whether or not you wanna be a personal manager or
an attorney. I have chosen just to be an attorney.