Well, let's discuss how my course works 
and the kind of resources that you're going to need to complete the 
assignments. Each week, there's a concept or two maybe 
that are presented and explained and ways to practice the concept and ways to put 
them to use. And of course, the assignment will be 
directly related to that concept. And a chance for you to show that you 
understand how it works and can incorporate it into your playing. 
So, in some cases, homework may involve things that you do right on the computer 
screen. Maybe checking boxes or filling in key 
words and that sort of thing. in other cases, there will be maybe some 
music written out, and you'll need to download this in a PDF file, and then add 
things to it on your own. It may be you'll have to write in some 
scales or write in some chord symbols or write in some lines or certain key notes 
or whatever. And, in that case, when you're finished 
with it you'll have to scan it and send it back to the site as a PDF file. 
So, you will need a scanner. You will also need to record yourself 
playing, creating MP3 files of your playing. 
And it doesn't have to be anything elaborate. 
we are not looking for studio audio quality here, just so it's clear to 
listen to. the simplest thing is to have a 
microphone and some basic recording software on your computer and you're in 
business. So, you'll create MP3 files and upload 
them to the site. Next, you will have some assignments that 
involve a play along, track, something that I have created for you, a rhythm 
section, playing a song. And you will need to play along with it 
and record both. The simplest way to do this, the least 
technological is to play the music out of your computer speakers and then play your 
instrument a few feet away. And place your microphone in between so 
that, you get a sort of a balance. A nice balance between your live 
instrument and the play-along tracks. And you can experiment a little bit to 
see where to place the mic. Again, great audio is not a requirement 
as long as the music can be heard relatively clearly, that will be 
perfectly fine. Some students are very technical and, 
equipped, and have much more sophisticated setups to do this. 
You're welcome to do it any way you want, but, you know I don't want you spending a 
lot of extra money on, other equipment and things just to complete the 
assignment. It's not necessary. 
I always get asked also about Notation Software. 
you do not need Sibelius or the other kinds of music notation software to 
complete the assignments for the course. You can use it if you wish, if you are 
very conversant in it and prefer writing that way, that's perfectly all right. 
But it's not, not a requirement. And again, don't feel like you have to go 
out, buy a new software, and learn how to use it, and so on. 
I'll make one more point, which is about the types of files. 
I've mentioned already PDF files, and MP3 files. 
these are the most universal. Virtually, everybody's computer can open 
up those files. If you record something in a wav file or 
a garage band file, a lot of students won't be able to see your work including 
me as well. So, my advice is to stick the most 
universal files. That's MP3 and MP4 when recording music. 
That's all you need to do the assignment for this course.