Creators of works actually have
copyright interest as soon as that work is created and
reduced to a tangible form. Either notated, or recorded on a CD,
on an MP3, or on a tape. But the best way to protect your work
is to file a copyright registration. Once again if you're in a country
outside of the United States you need to check with your country's
copyright laws to determine the best way to protect your works. Here in the United States,
you can protect your works by filing a copyright registration with
the US Copyright Office. When you file your copyright
with the US Copyright Office, you acquire greater remedies should
someone infringe on your copyright. What are those remedies? Well first, you have the right
to collect statutory damages. In other words, in the judge's discretion,
they can find the other party liable for damages of $750 up to
$30,000 per infringement. You only have that if you have
a US copyright registration. You also have the right
to go to federal court. Federal court here in the United States
means that you can sue anyone in any other state but you can only do
that if you file in federal court. You can also sue for a loss of profits
if you find that the infringement caused your business to lose
an extensive amount of money. If you have a copyright registration and
you sue someone for infringement and win the case, the judge has the discretion to order the losing party to pay
the winning party's attorney's fees. And that can be a very substantial amount. So that's a great, great remedy to have which you only have
if you have a US copyright registration. You also have the right to customs and
federal marshall seizures. In other words, if you know someone
is infringing on your copyrights, for instance, if they're shipping
in from out of the country recordings that are infringing on your
copyrights you can go to court and have the customs office seize those
goods as they cross the border. So how do you register your copyrights
with the US Copyright Office? Very important question. Well there's really three,
three steps that you have to follow. First you have to file an application for registration of the copyright either
the SR or the PA type of copyright. You can do that a couple
of different ways. One of the ways that the US Copyright
Office is really encouraging people to pursue is the electronic
filing of copyrights. You can do that by going to ECO. ECO stands for
Electronic Copyright Office. And once you get to that site and once you
get to that link, you will be able to fill out a copyright registration form for
either the performing arts registration for the composition,
or the sound recording copyright. And as a matter of fact, you can register
both the sound recording copyright and a copyright for
the underlying composition, the performing arts copyrights,
but only if you own the rights to both the sound recording and
the compositions that you're registering. So you can either file online or you can actually print out the forms and
mail them in. If you print out the forms,
you're gonna have a separate PA form and a separate sound recording copyright form. But if you're on the ECO site,
you're going to be able to register for both if you need to. The second step in the registration
process is to pay the fee. There is a fee for each copyright
registration for a work that you file. And here's where the copyright office
is really trying to encourage people to use the ECO the electronic
copyright office. Because to file a work on
the electronic copyright office site, it only costs you $35. If you send in a mail-in form for
the sound recording or the PA form, it costs $65. And the difference in the price
I'm sure is just a way for the copyright office to
encourage people to file online. And the last requirement
is to deposit the work. You have to deposit the work
with the copyright office. You can do that either by sending
an electronic copy in an MP3 or you can send the actual physical
copies to the copyright office. One question I hear often is,
can you file more than one song or more than one sound recording
on one copyright registration? Very important question. It can be very expensive if
you're filing one song for each registration at $35 or $65 each. Could become very, very expensive. Well yes, you can. You can file more than one song or sound
recording on one copyright registration. You can file a collection of works, but that is gonna be registered
under the title of the work. You know, I had a client a few years ago
who was from my hometown of Cleveland, Ohio and he had written a collection of
songs, a number of songs with a young artist who went on to become
a top-selling artist. And the artist recorded one of his songs
and the album went platinum I believe. And of course the songwriter
came to me and he said, John I know I copyrighted this song and
this artist is infringing on my work. I said fine,
find the copyright registration and we'll be able to go to court. Well it took him too long of a period, he didn't come to me until after finding
out about this song maybe a year or so and there is a three year statute
of limitations for filing a copyright infringement action from the time that
you first learn about the infringement. So he was very close to the last
day of the statute of limitations. Statute of limitations basically means
that after a certain period of time you lose your rights to file for
infringement of the action. So he had to really scramble to
find the copyright registration and he couldn't find it. He said, I know I copyrighted those songs. I knew I copyrighted the songs. Anyway, unfortunately he passed
the statute of limitations and then maybe six months later he called me. He said John, I finally found
the registration that it was on but I didn't file it on an individual
copyright registration form. I filed it under a collective work and
he said his name and the artist's name and
the title of the collection of works was My Client
the Artist Songs 1997. That was the title of the registration. There were maybe 14 songs
listed on the continuation pages of that and he had done that
multiple times with multiple songs. And so
he had really lost track of which songs were registered under which
title in collective works. So, I clearly see the benefit of artists
and even record companies and songwriters that own sound recordings filing copyright
registrations under collections. But if you do that,
you have to keep very very good records of which songs and which sound recordings
are being filed under which title so you can easily locate it should
someone infringe on your copyright.