Now let's get into the record
company operations. And I really want to ask some
questions about the 360 degree deal, which has become pretty
common in the music industry. And many, the knocks on doing 360 deals with
particularly major labels, such as yours, is that many people feel that the record
labels are passive and many of the activities beyond recording like
touring or merchandising, or sponsorships. Can you give me an idea
of how your label and others are becoming more involved in
the non-traditional revenue streams as far as being actively involved
in making things happen for their artists in these other
areas besides recordings? >> You are voicing a position. That sounds like somebody that may have
had a bad experience with a record label or they may have felt like
their label just wedged on and leeched off their other revenue streams. >> Well, that's exactly why I asked this
question, because I think that that is the attitude that you hear that's
projected most in this industry. And that's why I wanted to
speak to you and other people. Because I certainly know of situations
where it's been very beneficial to artists and- >> Well-
>> Go ahead. >> Let me say this. Again, I give you long-winded answers,
but follow me. I'm gonna bring around in a circle. >> All right. >> The future of the music business
is about four years away I think. I think around 2017, 18,19,
that's when the great golden, the new golden era,
of the record business is coming. I think it's the gold rush for
1849 and it's like 1845 right now. And that gold rush is going to be
precipitated by ubiquitous wi-fi. General broadband. The idea that when I open my laptop I'm
going to have 20 options for internet. I'm going to have Verizon, Google,
AT&T, Time Warner Cable, CableVision. Five companies that haven't been invented
yet that are gonna get into that business. But providing super
broadband is gonna become sort of the next frontier I think in
digital technology, and I kinda know. I have a lot of friends in this world. >> Right.
>> And compression technology takes a certain number of years to take hold,
et cetera. But, in about four years, when this new super Wi-Fi gets offered,
everybody that opens their laptop and logs onto one of their streams,
that they either, A, they either pay it for monthly, they get it for
free and it's advertising supported, or there's like a super luxury version
that's even faster than your monthly version that gives you internet
at speeds you can't even imagine. >> And
you're talking about music services. Not even the music services,
I'm talking about just Internet. >> Got it.
>> This is just, this is basic. First Google or Verizon, they're all at war right now trying to
see who's gonna get this magic stream. It's gonna be a multi-hundred
billion dollar play. But once you have this super Internet,
even your monthly subscription model, which is what most of the middle
class america is going to use. This monthly 49 dollar internet is going to be 100,000 times faster than
your home internet cable right now. And once that really kicks in, that's when you're gonna see
the death of the personal hard drive. That's when you're gonna see the true
cloud kicking in, and people saying, sure I could download it for free but
who wants to download anything? I don't have a hard drive. What a pain in the butt. I have server farms everywhere,
and my cloud is Instant. It'll make your iPhone feel
like a 200 terabyte hard drive. And this cloud and this monthly
cable bill that you're gonna pay, or monthly wi-fi bill, there's gonna
be a box that you're gonna X off, just like you X off your HBO right now. >> Right.
>> And that box will be for Spotify or Beats Music or one of the future
music subscription services. But that box will be about thirteen
dollars or ten dollars a month or 15 dollars a month, and it will offer you
every song in the history of mankind, every live performance uploaded every
Tuesday with curated playlists, your own playlists, your Pandora type radio, all
of those options are going to be there. And they're going to be seemless
everywhere you go, on airplanes, and you're going to have this
reception in subways, and when you're walking into your car they're is going to
be ubiquitous Wi-Fi and ubiquitous music. And when music becomes ubiquitous the
product that they are going to offer for $13 a month is simply going to be so
much more convenient than pirating or bit torrenting, no one's going to want
to do it., what a pain in the butt. And you have to throw it in your,
make your own play, no one's going to want to do it. And they're just going to say screw it,
I need my internet. Because everyone needs internet,
it's gonna be like cable is now. Kids in college have cable
that can barely afford it and still they know they need it. And when people start spending money on
music in that capacity cuz it's gonna be so convenient and you scale it to
India, China, Europe, Australia, Canada, the aggregate amount of money in
the music industry is gonna be massive. In 2001, we were a $40 billion business,
which was music and publishing combined. That was always the RIAA quote for
the general aggregate music industry. And I could be wrong, and you may show
this to somebody in five years and say that Jacobson guy
couldn't have been more off, but I think that conservatively it's going
to be a $50 billion business in 2020. And that's only because people
won't believe me when I tell you I think it's going to be
a $70 billion business. The reason I'm telling you all of this. This is important for you to follow here. >> Alright. >> Is that until we hit the tipping point, until we hit critical mass in
this new subscription service, which is going to depend on
ubiquitous wifi in order to happen, until we hit that number,
record labels don't have money. We have cash flow problems. Very real cash flow issues. If you're an artist and your signing on to
a record label, you have to know that your label, as a machine, doesn't have as much
cash flow as it will or as it used to be. Back in the 90s we had enough cash flow
that we could handle all versions of the artist development on our own without
having to share publishing or touring, because we were making enough
money off of recorded music. Recorded master was valuable enough
that we could handle that side and use that to invest in
the artist development. Artist development costs money. Hit records costs money. Coordinating a global radio campaign
around the world, making sure that there's an advertising campaign that is
supporting your record at radio. It's not enough just to have a hit at
radio, you've gotta have money being spent on the advertising around that hit so
people know what the song is. Otherwise it becomes what's
called a turntable hit, a record that's big on radio,
but doesn't sell. In order to connect those two and
to bridge all of that, it takes thousands of people and
millions of dollars. I wish that there was some utopian
world that didnt have to happen. But even in situations where there's
an independent artist who owns his own rights, like a Macklemore,
who is a wonderful story, there was still a multi-thousand
person campaign, a radio campaign, that pushed to
get those records to number one. He absolutely created the buzz on his own
and created enough buzz that he had enough leverage in his negotiations for a record
deal to be able to maintain his rights. But I wish that everybody worked that way,
and maybe they'll do that in the future, but in the mean time if you're gonna come
to me, and maybe you're moving at 30, or 40, or 50 miles an hour, but you wanna
go to 150 miles an hour, costs money. >> Right. >> The 360 deal provides us with
an opportunity to be able to, in the short term, create a cash flow, to create some cash flow to
continue to market these records. Because we're not making enough money off
of 700,000 albums and a million singles. That's ten million dollars
gross which is a lot of money. But when it costs us eight million
dollars to get to that ten million dollar gross number
we're not making enough profit. If we had a business that operated off
of a two million dollar profit for an eight million expense,
it's just not sustainable. It doesn't exist. It's math. I wish it were different. Maybe it will be down the line,
but in the meantime if somebody on that ten million
dollar worth of records sold right, singles plus albums, can add three
million dollars between publishing and touring contributions to the bottom line,
that affects everything. That makes it so
that we can run our business. We're a public company. We're owned by Vivendi. Vivendi is a stock ticker. We have to make profit in order
to maintain our existence. I know that people can get upset and
feel like they were extremely profitable but now,
and other people weren't. I mean I've heard it all. Not that it doesn't matter but be realistic about the fact
that we have a business to run. >> Right.
>> And if you want us to continue to
invest in your project, which we want to do, we have to have
ways to be able to support ourselves. >> Great, now let me ask you this, Neal. Because in that regard then
are you actively involved, and I'm saying this because I think you
guys purchased Bravado, is that correct? >> Correct.
>> While before merchant and that's the thing are you
bringing in other areas? Are you partnering with management
companies that are gonna assist you in this 360 degree effort? >> Think of it a different way,
stop thinking about it like that. It's not about you don't no business
operates in the specifics of exactly who does what, where they do it,
and what they're doing. >> Okay. >> That's not the nature. By the way that's not
the nature in our business. It's not how Nike does business. It's not how global branding companies
that deal with mass initiatives handle their things. We're not, there's a million different
ways that I might help out with something, and there's a million different ways that
other things that I am at the core of making happen will happen around
me without me directly making it. That's not what our business is. What we're saying is,
I'm going to invest our label's time, money, initiatives, our focus,
we're gonna invest our resources, our connections, and
we're gonna invest in your property and developing this property, and
as this property develops and we make a hit record, or a hit video,
or a hit advertising campaign, or whatever it is that we're doing as a team
that is helping take your copyrights and make them more valuable, we are gonna
share In the value of those copyrights. >> Right.
>> When we make a record and it's a number one record around the world. It's not that hard to get a merch deal. >> Right.
>> It's not that hard to get a big promotion deal. We're the ones that are spending the money
to help make your hit record and your hit record is going to be
what you need to sell tickets. >> Right.
>> You know a lot of people have a utopian view. There's a lot of acts that sell
without radio and that's fine and I have a lot of acts that
are succesful without that radio. But there's no acts that are successful
without marketing themselves. And we're helping market you. And if we help build this brand, we need
to share in all the revenue streams. Otherwise, we can't spend enough money to
help make you the star that you wanna be. >> That's fantastic. >> It doesn't exist. >> That's great Neil and
how's that working for you? All these other revenue streams, are they
actually starting to generate income? >> Sure, sure.
>> That will help meet the bottom line. >> Buddy, not just for
us, for our artists. You know when we're getting paid
our ancillary revenues, if we're at a point where we're getting paid
ancilliaries, the artist is getting paid. >> Got it.
>> Aand that's great for everybody.