When I first started practicing
law over 30 years ago, recording agreements were
pretty simple documents. Maybe 10 or
12 pages which basically talked about the advance that the artist would receive,
the royalties that they receive. The predominant
configuration of recordings, the sale of recordings at that time,
consisted of vinyl records and cassettes. 10 or 12 pages. Well, it's changed a lot. The recording agreements
have evolved over the years. And I'm gonna show you a copy of the last
agreement that I negotiated earlier this year. And as you can see, it's much different
from the agreements from years ago. Here's a copy of the agreement. 70 pages. I always bring this into class and
I drop it on the podium for emphasis, just to let students know this is
a pretty thick, very serious document. Now why, do you say, why 70 pages? Why 70 pages? Well, what happened is for
each technological advancement in the music industry, these contracts
have gotten longer and longer and longer. Why?
Because there's more pages added, more provisions added
to cover the rights and obligations that result from these
new technological advancements. For instance,
when I first started practicing in 1980, CDs hadn't even entered the marketplace,
but within a couple of years they did. You had four or five pages added to
deal with CDs and the rights and obligations related to the CD becoming
a new configuration in the music industry. Also in the early 80s you had another technological advancement, cable TV, and a new cable channel,
Music Television, MTV. So record companies had to
start producing music videos. Another five or
six pages were added to account for that. And on and on it went. As we got into the 90s
you had the development, in the latter part of the 90s,
of the digital age. And paragraph by paragraph,
technological advancement by advancement, you had additional pages
added to these contracts. Very, very important. Why?
Because the purpose of an exclusive recording agreement is to establish and document the asset value of the company. What do I mean by that? What are assets? Assets are things of value. And what do exclusive recording
artists contracts do? Well, they convey rights and
obligations on both of the parties. So we're gonna talk about two of
the things that I think create value for a record company and for an artist in
an exclusive recording artist agreement. First is what I call the most
valuable asset in the music industry, which is the copyright. Now we're gonna deal with copyright
in the next lesson to a great degree, so I'm not gonna dwell on
it too seriously this time. But in speaking about the exclusive
recording artist agreement, it's important to note
that record companies want the rights to the copyrights
in the sound recordings. There's various types of copyrights under
the law, and we're gonna deal with two or three in this course that really relate to the music industry as
it currently stands today. Record companies are concerned about
the sound recording copyright. What is the sound recording copyright? What is a sound recording? That is a recording of a composition,
and a composition is another copyright that we're going
to deal with in the next lesson. But the sound recording
is the fixation of sounds that make up the recording
of a composition. What do I mean by that? Well, you'll have a basic song
that an artist will record. An arranger will get involved,
a producer will get involved. Other musicians might come in. You might have a rhythm section come in. You might have strings come in or
you might use a synthesized strings. You're gonna have an arrangement. You're gonna have someone
coach the vocalist on the interpretation of the song. That's basically what the producer does. All of these people are involved
in producing this sound recording, the fixation of sounds that make
up the version of the composition. Record companies want to own the rights
to the copyrights in the sound recording. Now what is a copyright? Well, a copyright is a piece
of intellectual property. It's just like owning real estate. Of course, it isn't real at
all because it's in the air. You can't put your finger on it. It's called intellectual property. It's the creation of the mind and
talent as well. So an artist that performs on a recording,
for instance, I performed with the group Cameo,
and the inflections of my voice and my creative work in the studio is something that the record
company wants the rights to. And under the exclusive recording artist
agreement, that's exactly what happens. The artist and everyone involved in
the process of creating the sounds that are fixed on that sound recording need
to be transferred to the record company because the record company wants to own
those rights in the sound recording. Why do they wanna own the rights
in the sound recording? What's the value of owning that
sound recording copyright? Well, the copyright can last for
life plus 70 years. There's some other rights that we'll
talk about in the next lesson regarding copyright. So if I record and produce my own
song in my home studio and I'm ready to release it, and I wanna release it
through my company, John Kellogg Music, Then I'm gonna transfer my
copyright interest to my company, John Kellogg Music, and they will own
that copyright for my life plus 70 years. Subject to some limitations which
we'll talk about next week. But after that life plus 70 year period, then that copyright falls into what is
called public domain, which means that anybody can use that copyright and they
don't have to get permission from anyone. With a copyright, that gives you like
a monopoly on that intellectual property. Nobody else can use that property. Nobody else can use that sound recording
without getting your permission during the life of copyright. So why do companies want
to own sound recordings? Why do they wanna have that right? And you need to know this as well. Record companies don't require you to assign your interest in
copyright over to them for nothing. No, this is the reason why
you have an agreement. The record company is saying assign
that copyright interest over to us and in exchange for you assigning
the copyright interest over to us, we are gonna pay you royalties for
you assigning that interest. Record companies want to own those sound
recordings because over the life of copyright, those sound recordings
can be used in a number of ways. I'm just gonna give you a couple of ways. One, they can be sold. Those sound recordings can be sold in
different types of configurations. Digital downloads. They can be sold in CDs. They can also be used in other ways. They can be used for streaming purposes. So the record company is in position,
by owning that copyright, to negotiate with the people that
want to use those recordings. For instance, streaming services,
Spotify, iRadio and others, they have to get the permission
from the owners of the sound recordings to stream those sound recordings. And here's another use that's becoming
even more and more important in the music industry today, and
that is the right to synchronize those sound recordings to a video image. That's called the synchronization right. And what do I mean by synchronize? That means in time sequence
taking a recording and putting it in maybe a commercial,
a movie, the background in a movie or a TV show or a video on the Internet. Very, very important right. Why?
Because the people that want to use and sign these synchronization licenses so
that they can use the sound recordings in these various mediums
usually have to pay a fee. And it's a very, very important
revenue source for record companies. So the transfer of copyright
interest is one of the things, one of the things of value in
having a recording agreement. It establishes the right
in the record company, and that could be your own
record company as an artist. Why, as an artist,
should you have your own record company? Because at some point you might want
to do a deal with a major label, an Internet distributor. You might wanna license your
recordings to other people. And at that point you want to
establish those ownership interests in an entity that's working for you. Why? Because in the American
system of capitalism, businesses like to build
value in their assets, and the copyrights are assets
that usually grow in value. The more you exploit those copyrights in various mediums,
it builds the value more and more. One of the most remarkable
companies in the history of the current music industry
is Motown Records. Motown's master recordings are very, very valuable, because you'll hear
them in commercials all the time. You'll hear them in movies. So the exclusive recording
artist agreement, one, transfers the sound recording copyright interest
to the company, which is very important. And two, it provides for
the artist to render their exclusive recording services for a period of time or
a certain product commitment. That could be four to six albums. Why is that important? Well, I release my record on my
own through digital distribution. It starts getting a lot of social media,
turns into a viral sensation. And let's say a major label approaches
me and said, we really like what you do, John, and
we'd like to sign you to an agreement. Well, it's important for me to say, well,
I have my own company, John Kellogg Music, and I have a contract with my company
where I'm gonna record five albums. Now I've recorded the first one and
released it and that's the one that generated all the heat
and the reason for you wanting to sign me. But I have four more albums under
my contract, so let's deal. My company can deal
with you on that basis. And it puts you in a much better
negotiating position to have that. Now what do I mean by
exclusive recording services? Well, that means that I can't record for
anyone else, any other company during
that period of time. That's very important, very important. And we talk about the evolving
nature of recording agreements. I think it's important to talk about
the fact that record companies back in the early 80s enforced that provision, the exclusivity provision in
contracts pretty severely. I remember back in the early 80s
when I first started practicing and I represented the O'Jays. And they had the opportunity
to record with Stevie Wonder, and in fact,
did record with Stevie Wonder. And at that time Stevie Wonder
was at the top of his game, the O'Jays were at the top of their game,
and they went into the studio and Stevie recorded a song called All I Do. All I Do, great record,
by the way, great, great record. Stevie plays all of the instruments on it,
and of course, you know he's a fabulous musician as well
as a great, great vocalist and songwriter. And the O'Jays not only
provided background vocals for him, but during some point
in the recording the O'Jays did what is called in the industry,
they stepped out. And by that we mean that they started
riffing and they started improvising over certain tracks, to the point
that you could recognize that, hey, that's Eddie Levert on that track. Wow, the O'Jays are recording
with Stevie Wonder. Two superstars, this is fantastic! Walter Williams,
the other lead singer of the O'Jays, did his trademark signature
licks throughout the song. It was fantastic. I remember the O'Jays brought the,
at that time, cassette tape back with them and
we were listening to it. And all of the people in their
camp were really excited. This had never been done before, superstars coming together
to record tracks. Well, as it turns out, at that time
record companies were really concerned about allowing their artists to record on
other artists' tracks because they thought that it would cannibalize the sale
of their own artists' recordings. To the point that the O'Jays' record
company did not agree to allow the step-out vocals of the O'Jays' to
be used, and so they had to pull it. They couldn't mix those tracks into it, which to me was the thing that
really made the recording special. But the O'Jays were allowed
to do the background vocals. And the other background vocalist
on that track was Michael Jackson, but he was signed to Motown, or at least Motown had to give him the
permission to record with Stevie Wonder. So I think that that shows
that there was one time that the exclusivity provisions in contracts
were very strictly adhered to. And it's important for you to know that
if you sign with a record company, you just can't go record with anyone and
everyone without getting the permission of the record company
that you're signed with. You are their exclusive recording artist. Now that situation has changed. Once again, these contracts evolve. As you got into the rap genre really
gaining significant prominence in the 90s and in the first part of this
century and currently, you started to have artists provide guest vocals, step-out
vocals, on a number of recordings. And now if you look on the current
Billboard charts, you're gonna possibly find in the top ten, maybe five or
six of the top ten feature guest artists. And record companies started to
loosen their restrictiveness on the exclusivity provisions, and they really started to allow their artists
to appear on other artists' recordings. Of course, they demanded a certain
royalty, or percentage of a royalty, when their guest artist appear. But also I think it's important to note
that record companies found value in their artist being promoted as a result of
being guest artists on other recordings. So once again, the transfer of the sound
recording copyrights, two, the providing of the exclusive recording services
of the artist to the record company, are very important things that build
the asset value of the record company.