If I was down and out, had no place to go. Would you still be there? If I was down and out, had no place to go. Would you still be there. That's pretty high for
me to sing right now. But when I was a junior in college
that melody and those lyrics came to me as I was walking down the side of
a grassy knoll on at Syracuse University. And that was the first time I
recognized that wow, a song came to me. I might actually have
the talent to write a song. Well I went home after that and I put the
verse to the song and finished the song. At that time I could have
recorded the song and protected the rights in that composition
in the melody and the lyrics. The copyright in
the composition is a very, very important asset
in the music industry. One of America's greatest song writers,
Lionel Richie, claims that back in the 80s when he was
recording his monster hit albums he used to ride around the streets of
Los Angeles with a cassette recorder. And he said that he would hear songs
playing on a radio station in his mind that he had never heard before and
he simply turned on the tape recorder and started to record those songs
that he heard in his mind. So people have the talent
to create songs and that talent comes to
them in different ways. But it's very, very important because
the US copyright law protects original creative works of
the mind Intellectual property for limited times established by Congress,
which makes intellectual property different from
other types of property like real estate, that you could own forever,
or in perpetuity. But even though you could only
own these creative works for a limited period of time, as a result
of the ownership of these works, I say the copyright is the most valuable, long term asset you can
own in the music industry. It gives the author
a monopoly on these works. In other words, no one else can use
those works during the term of copyright without getting the author's permission. The US copyright law has made
the United States a leader in entertainment worldwide. And entertainment and music is one of
the United States' leading exports. It seems the world loves American music,
in particular. Why? Because American music is like a gumbo. Its full of different styles
from all across the world. African rhythms, Latin rhythms. Folk music from Europe. The far east, the middle east. All combined into a very unique sound
that the US Copyright Act was set up to encourage Americans to create works
by protecting their works and allowing them to have the exclusive rights to those
works for a specific period of time.