So what happens if someone infringes
on your copyright either in your sound recording or your composition? In other words, they use portions
of your prior copyrighted work. Well if you think that they've
infringed on your rights, you can certainly send them notice and
file a claim. At some point,
if you have a US copyright registration, you can sue them in Federal Court. However, I want to let you
know that suing people for copyright infringement and proving
the case isn't an easy thing to do. Because if you go to court, you're gonna have musicologists that
are gonna testify on both sides. And they're really going to notate
each song and really compare to see how close that song comes or
that sound recording comes to the other. And that could be a very
difficult process. As a matter of fact most copyright
claims are usually settled before there's a decision in the case. A lot of people also ask me
well I've heard about this rule that if you only use four bars
of somebody else's song or sound recording then it's not
considered copyright infringement. False. It could even be three notes. The NBC television network used
to have a three note sound logo that they used to play at
the top of every hour. Now I can't repeat those notes here, because I don't wanna
infringe on their copyright. But if I did, or
anybody else used those three notes, the NBC network could sue them for
copyright infringement. So if you feel that your copyrights
have been infringed upon, and you have US copyright registrations, you're in a position to sue in
the US Federal Court system. And once you get to the case and get to the trial level,
there are three elements of proof. Three elements of proof and
this is the reason why I say that. Proving copyright infringement
is really no joke. it isn't as easy as anyone thinks. Many times people will hear songs and
then say that sounds just like this song. That person should sue that person for
copyright infringement, and they fail to recognize that there
are three elements that you have to prove. And it might be difficult
overcoming some of those hurdles. Let's talk about the first
element of proof. One, you have to prove that you actually
have a US copyright registration, as I mentioned earlier. You have to bring that
copyright registration. To court so make sure that you carefully
catalog your copyright registrations. Two, you have to prove access. You have to prove that the person
that infringed on your work had access to your copyrighted work. They heard that work before and
that's the thing, that's the reason why they created
their work incorporating your work. Access isn't that easy
of a thing to prove. Certainly if you went back
stage with an artist and you played them a song and there were
other people in the room who could testify the artist heard that song
on that particular date. And then three month later the artist comes out with a song that
sounds just like your song. But they didn't get permission from you. That's a pretty easy
case of proving access, however it usually
doesn't happen that way. You don't have to have just direct
evidence of access however. In some cases, you can prove access
through circumstantial evidence. in other words, you can prove that
an artist that infringe upon your work had listened to the radio stations
that your song had been played on, and therefore must have
had access to your song. So access isn't as easy
as it sounds to prove. I had a client that came to me and said
Mr. Kellogg, Stevie Wonder stole my song. Stevie Wonder stole my song. So I said well, okay. But knowing that I had to prove access,
I said but how did Stevie Wonder hear your song before creating this other song
that you say infringed on your song? And he said well, I sent it to Motown. I sent it out to California and
I sent it to Detroit. And by that time I knew
that record labels and publishing companies had stopped
taking unsolicited material and this is the reason why they stopped
taking unsolicited material and by that I mean they will only take
material from people that they know. Talent agents or lawyers that they
really have good relationships with. So you aren't gonna find
the kind of situation that just because a song you hear on
the radio sounds something like your song, then there's copyright infringement. No, you really have to prove that the
person that you claimed infringed on your work had prior access to your work and
developed their work based on your work. So I turned that case down. The case eventually went to trial. They couldn't prove access. And they lost the case. And as I said before the judge
in a copyright infringement case can order the losing party to pay
the winning party's attorney's fees. And in this case the judge did
indeed order that potential client to pay Steve Wonder's attorney's
fees in the amount of $240,000 dollars. So as I indicated as before, copyright infringement cases aren't as
easy to prove as a lot of people think. So you have to be very careful because you
could be ordered to pay the attorney's fees should you lose the case. All right, the elements to prove
a copyright infringement case. First you have to have
the copyright registration. Second you have to prove access and the
third element is Substantial Similarity. You have to prove that your
work was infringed upon and the other person that created a work,
that infringed upon yours. It's substantially similar
to your copyrighted work. Substantial similarity is
determined on a case by case basis. And as I alluded to earlier,
each party is gonna have their expert, usually a musicologist, that's either gonna try to prove that the
song is similar or that it isn't similar. And that's gonna really be determined
by either the judge or the jury. So there is no set formula to
determine substantial similarity. It's really gonna come down to
the evidence that's presented by both of the parties and the determination that's
made either by the judge or the jury. However, if the two works are strikingly
similar where anyone can hear that the music is really the same,
then you don't even have to prove access in order to proceed
with a copyright infringement suit. I remember having one client's song used, I felt a certain portion of their song
used in another popular artist's song, and I raised this issue to the publishing
company that administered the songs on behalf of my client, and to me, it really
sounded like copyright infringement. Well, the publisher was smart. >> the publisher hired a musicologist to
actually notate the rhythms, the melodies and the lyrics to determine whether or
not it was enough to move forward. whether or
not it was substantially similar or not. Although, I disagreed with the publisher,
I had to go along with their decision. Because they are experts in that
particular area of determining whether or not it's worth going forward with
a copyright infringement claim.