All right, now it's time for
us to talk about and examine some key provisions in
the exclusive recording artist agreement. Now once again,
I really want you to refer to your text, be sure to read through the text
exclusive recording artist agreement. And be sure to at least read
the right side, the annotated side, of each page of that agreement so
it gives you an understanding. Of course, if you're an artist or
if you're just starting your own record company or have a desire to start their
own record company, you always have to have an experienced entertainment
lawyer review the agreement for you. But it is still important for you to have an idea of what some
of these provisions are saying. There was a great retailer,
his name was Sy Syms, that started the Syms Department Store chains,
which was very big here on the East Coast. And Sy Syms coined a very interesting
hook and a very interesting phrase. You know I'm big on hooks. Every time the music gets played,
somebody gets paid. Get paid, not played. Well, Sy Syms came up with a great hook,
and that was,
an educated consumer is my best customer. The Syms department store
sold off-price clothing and great name brands at
tremendously discounted price. They were really styles that might
have been a season out of fashion, and they would buy them and sell them
in their stores at reduced prices. Kind of cornered the market
in the northeast. It was fantastic. Well, I say that an educated
musician is my best client. And what do I mean by that? That's one of the reasons
why I wrote my book. I wanted my clients to understand the kind
of issues that I was dealing with on their behalf. Now there's been some significant
changes that have occurred in recording agreements even since
the beginning of this century. As you can imagine, artists, and
it's no secret, songwriters, producers and other creative talent,
were tremendously ripped off [LAUGH] in the early parts from
the 20s through the 50s and 60s. It wasn't until the 1970s that there was
even an entertainment law profession to some degree, for entertainment
lawyers that represented artists to help them gain greater rights in their
recordings and in their copyrighted works. But over that period of time, for
the 50 years between 1950 and 2000, the recording contracts
were very confusing. They were very confusing. Possibly intentionally confusing. Very non-transparent. It was very hard for artists in reading
contracts to be able to figure out how they were gonna get paid and
what their actual royalty rates are. So we're gonna discuss a couple
of the key provisions. We're gonna speak about the term. We're gonna exam the term,
how long the contract lasts. We're gonna talk about
the various types of royalties that artists are entitled to under
exclusive recording artist agreements. Advances we're gonna speak about,
advances are very important. Advances are amounts of royalties
that are paid in advance. Artists pay certain dollar amounts that
are deemed advances against royalties, which means that when the artist starts
earning royalties, those royalties are kept by the record company until
the advances are recouped or recovered. And we're also gonna talk about
the new provisions in recording agreements that really started to develop
at the beginning of this century, 360 degree deal provisions, and we're
gonna talk about that as time goes on. The first thing you need to know is
that in the current market today, many artists who are discovered
by record companies and have had no recording
experience whatsoever sometimes are signed to development deals or
even singles deals. And those deals usually provide
a very low amount of an advance and a promise of a royalty rate. And it gives the artist as well as a commitment to pay certain recording
costs for a certain number of demos or a certain number of singles to
see if the artist really sells. If the artist's material does sell,
then at that point the record company has provisions that allow them to
pick up options for various albums. And we're gonna talk about
that a little later. Let's talk about the term,
the term of the recording agreement. How long does the recording
agreement last? In the 60s and 70s, artists signed
recording agreements with terms that were described in a term of years. For example,
the artist would sign a contract for one year with four one-year options. What does that mean? That means that the artist is
signed to record for one year. If the record company likes
what the artist is doing and their product is selling in great numbers, then the record company has the option
to pick up the second year. And if they like what they
did in the second year, they can pick up the third year, so
on and so forth through the fifth year. So when artists back in those days looked
at those contracts, they could possibly think that, wow, I have a five-year
contract with a record company. Well, that isn't necessarily the case. The record company doesn't have
to pick up the second year. And here's something else that kind
of confused the artist at that time. Even though the contract said that
it was one year, the term was one year with four one-year options,
what the artist might not have seen in the following pages was a provision that
stated that during that contract year, the record company had the right
to record one album on the artist. But they also had an option
within that first year to ask the artist to record a second album. And if the artist didn't deliver that
second album within that one-year period, that one-year period was extended until
they did complete the second album. That became pretty problematic as we got
into the MTV years and videos were made. Because when MTV came out and
videos became very popular, record companies didn't want an artist to release
an album but every two or three years, because they wanted to put out a video
on each single, three or four singles. And they tried to sell that album
over the course of two years, and many times the album sales would continue
to develop over a two-year period. So some of those artists that
signed those kind of contracts thought they were signed for five years. As it turns out, the record company might
have decided to record two albums during each year, and the year was extended
until the second album was delivered. And the second album might
not have been delivered for two years after the start of that period. Artists started becoming involved in
contracts that lasted a number of years, ten years or more. As a matter of fact, Prince,
the great artist Prince, signed his first contract in 1977 or
1978, and the contract didn't end until he
negotiated a settlement of the contract in 1995 or 96 with Warner Bros Records, and
at that time he still owed two albums. Now of course, the contract
had possibly been renegotiated giving Warner Bros the rights
to additional albums. But that gives you some kind of an idea
of the length of the contracts and why artists, particularly at
the end of the last century and the beginning of this century,
were really upset about provisions that possibly required them to
stay with one company for an extended period of time,
possibly their whole career. So that was an example of
the non-transparency of recording artist agreements and
the confusing nature, particularly of their provision dealing with the term of
the exclusive recording artist agreement. Now I do wanna say that record companies,
and as a result of certain lawsuits that were brought and certain
court decisions that were rendered, the record companies in the 80s and
90s started to change that provision. Instead of it being one year
plus four one-year options, they decided to change the period of
time to what were called periods. They would have multiple periods to
the contract, which means the first period would be the time that it took
to record and release an album. Plus maybe seven months after that for the
record company to see how the album did in the marketplace, at which time they could
pick up the option for the second period. And during each period the artist
is required to record one album. So that still created a situation
where artists were still bound to maybe eight to ten periods for contracts that were entered
into in the 80s and in the 90s,
which is still a very long period of time. So things have evolved in
exclusive recording agreements. In the latter part of the 90s,
artists really became very frustrated. And Prince was one of
the primary advocates. Some of you might have seen him on
The Today Show in the middle of the 90s, when he stopped going by the name
Prince and just went by a symbol. And when he was on the Today Show, he had
slave written on the side of his face. And part of his point was that he felt
that record companies that signed you to such long agreements were
treating you like a slave because they had the exclusive rights
to your recording services for such an extended period of time. To him it really didn't make sense. That kind of ignited the artist community
at the end of the 90s to really start advocating for more fairness, more transparency with exclusive
recording artist agreements. And at the beginning of this century,
there were certain actions taken by the California legislature which
kind of questioned these agreements and threatened the recording
industry with legislation that would make the contracts
more transparent. And as a result of that,
record companies got the point. And at the beginning of this century they
really started to recognize that, well, maybe their contracts were
a little unreasonable, asking for possibly ten albums from an artist. And voluntarily,
although it really wasn't voluntary, they did it as a result of the pressure
from the artist community, record companies started to change
the term provisions of their contracts. Instead of asking for
a potential ten albums from a new artist, eight to ten albums from an artist, they
reduced that to four to six albums a term, which would give them a number of periods
to record either four to six albums. Now what do I mean by four to six albums? Well, an artist that has a lot leverage,
and what do I mean by leverage? I mean clout. And by that I'll give you an example. Let's say an artist has
a number of YouTube views, millions of YouTube views, and they've
built up a great audience on their own. Well, that artist is gonna
have a lot of leverage, a lot of clout, if a major label comes
in and wants to negotiate with them. The major label might first offer to
sign them to a six-album contract. And of course, the artist's attorney in
that situation would be wise to say no, we don't want to record six. We will record three albums for you. And then, of course, the record company
is going to counter maybe five, and eventually they might agree to four. So it depends on your leverage as
to how many albums you're going to end up recording under the exclusive
recording artist agreement. Of course, the record label will want
you to record as many as possible. And of course, as an artist,
you want to record as few as possible, so that if you're successful during that
four album or five album period, you'll have the opportunity to test out
the market and to see if there's other companies that are interested in recording
you under a new recording agreement. So the term, how long the agreement lasts, is an evolving provision of the exclusive
recording artist agreement. You'll remember when I said earlier
that the contracts of the 60s and 70s had one year plus four
one-year options and during each contract year the artist might have to
record two albums, a potential ten albums. Now who has the option,
who has the option? Who has the right to pick up the option? Usually the record company will have
the right to pick up the option. Record companies say that they
need to have the right to pick up the options because they've invested a lot
of money in the artist, in recording, producing, marketing,
distributing the record. So they should have the right,
if the record is successful, to pick up the option so that they can try to realize
some profit from that initial investment. However, as you can see, this contract
provision in particular is evolving, and has evolved and continues to evolve. Now your contract with your
company should probably be for the norm, four to six albums. So that if you want to do
a deal with a major label, you're in a position to assign those
rights, if that's what you have to do, to the major label for the maximum
amount of albums that you have. But once again,
when I say that that is the norm, that doesn't mean that that is
the only way the situation can occur. Just like these contracts have
evolved over the past years, they're gonna evolve even
further in the future. And the digital landscape is really
changing the way things are done. And the key is that it
comes down to leverage. If you have sold a lot of product,
if you become very popular and become a very important
asset to the record company, you're in a position to
negotiate better terms. For instance, I'm gonna use Prince again, a revolutionary artist not only as a
musical talent but also as a businessman. In 1994 he was a little perturbed with
his record company in releasing singles, and there was a song that he really
wanted to release on his own. And as a result of Prince being Prince,
being a multi-million selling artist, he was able to release one single,
The Most Beautiful Girl in the World, independently, through an independent
distributor, Al Bell's Bellmark Records. That record went on to become extremely
successful, and it was one single. It was a one-off, as they call it. In other words, they allowed him to
release one single independently and it became tremendously successful. After he ended his contract with Warner
Bros Records, Price became known as being the one artist who could have one-offs
with various major record labels. And by that I mean he could release an
album with a different company each time. Very few artists can do that, but he
showed the possibility of that happening. So keep in mind, you may not have to enter
into a long-term agreement with any party. It depends on your leverage. And in today's music industry you can
build your leverage in a number of different ways that weren't around,
even two or three years ago. If you have a number,
millions of YouTube views, if you have a very strong presence
with your Instagram account, if you have a number of Facebook likes,
you could have one of your recordings used in a television commercial or in the
background of a movie scene or a TV show. It could become a viral video as a result of the success of that particular scene or
that particular commercial. All of that helps you
build up leverage and puts you in position to be on the cutting
edge of the evolving music industry. You could really negotiate for terms that have never been negotiated
before, which moves this industry forward.