And lastly, let's deal with
the topic of 360 degree deals. 360 degree deals are sometimes
referred to as all-rights agreements, all-rights agreements. What do I mean by a 360 degree deal? Well, we have to look back. In the last century, record companies
signed artists to recording agreements and primarily earned income strictly from
the sale or use of the artist recordings. That's how a record
company made its money. From selling or licensing out
the use of those sound recordings. That was the only income
they were concerned with. And as a result of CD sales and record and
album sales increasing from the 70s all the way through the end of the 90s, that's
all the money the record company wanted. They made a tidy profit off of
just selling and using recordings. But then what happened? [SOUND] Napster. [LAUGH] Right? Peer-to-peer file sharing. An immediate decrease in CD album sales. And a lot of the profit that the record
company was making started to evaporate. So record companies had to look around for other sources of income to try
to make up for that deficit. I remember maybe 2002,
2003 that I called a record company that had an agreement
with my clients, and I was arguing for a percentage interest
in the copyrights in the compositions. I felt that my clients had
made a contribution to the songs that they recorded and
they were never given credit for it. Now the company that I was dealing with
was made up of creative people as well. Producers who were also songwriters. And as I pressed this point that
I want my clients to participate in the songwriting income, the attorney
got a little perturbed and he said, wait a minute, John, you know your clients
have had a hit career for over 25 years. My clients wrote and
produced most of the hit songs, and as a result of my clients
contributing those great hit songs, your clients have been
able to sell out concerts. They've been able to act in TV shows and
in movies. They've been able to acquire
sponsorships and endorsements. And you know something? We don't participate in that income. We never have. He said, hm, John, you know something? Maybe my clients should
ask your clients for a certain percentage of their
live performance income. A certain percentage of their publishing,
of their merchandising, of their acting fees,
of their sponsorships. Hm, maybe that's something
that we should think about. And that was my first inclination that
people at the major label level were thinking about participating in income
other than the sale and use of recordings. And shortly after that,
EMI entered into what was considered the first major label 360 degree
deal with Robbie Williams, who was a huge artist worldwide except for
the United States. Where Robbie entered into a deal where
he gave up a certain interest in his publishing, he gave up
a certain percentage interest in his merchandising,
sponsorship. Any activities within the entertainment
area, EMI was gonna participate in the earnings, and that's generally what
these 360 degree deals are all about. In other words, the record company doesn't
just participate in the income generated from the use and sale of those sound
recordings, but they participate in the entire circle, 360 degrees,
of income that the artist generates. So now most deals that you
will sign with major labels, at least a major label is gonna try
to get you to sign a 360 degree deal. If you have a lot of leverage, you might be able to negotiate
out of a 360 degree deal. But in most instances artists
are gonna sign 360 degree deals. Which means that the record
company is at least gonna have options to pick up contracts for
merchandising with the artist. So that they'll participate in a certain
amount of the merchandising income, sponsorship income,
endorsement income, live performance. Maybe a certain percentage, 10, 15% of the net revenue from
live performances will be paid. Never before has that been
done at the major label level. But it has been done at
the independent label level as well as small production companies. That's been done for years,
for the past 20 or 30 years, under deals called
the across-the-board deal. Across-the-board deal was a deal
where a production company would sign an unknown artist to not only a recording
agreement but they would sign them to a copublishing agreement and participate
in their songwriter's royalties. They might even sign them to a management
agreement, where they would also participate in any of the other
income that the artist generated. So this has been happening for years with smaller labels, independent
labels and production companies. They have always done it themselves. We talk about do it yourself,
and now I see it's more and more important for artists to do it
ourselves, have a team surrounding them that's gonna help them generate income
from a number of different sources. Well, independent labels and production companies have been doing
it themselves for a number of years. Even Motown, back in the 60s, they in
effect had an across-the-board deal. Berry Gordy had a management company that
managed all of the talent at Motown. The songwriters who happened to be artists also had to give up their
publishing interests to Motown. And it sounds, I even approach
it as an artist's attorney, it's like the labels are being greedy. They're taking money from
every source possible. But in certain situations
it might be warranted. It was certainly warranted
in the Motown years. Berry Gordy was in
a position to drive over 100 singles to number one on the charts. So as a result of that,
artists were able to work more. They were able to get greater
opportunities for TVs, for movies. Diana Ross went on to star in
Lady Sings the Blues, in Mahogany. All of these things where artists
are morphing into other types of careers, the record label feels
like they started that. Without that initial recording, and that's why the exclusive recording
agreement is so important. It's the genesis of all of the other
types of activities an artist can be involved in to generate income. So record companies wanna
be a part of that and feel that they have
the right to participate. So the question always has been, even
dealing with the across-the-board deals as well as the 360 degree deals, are the
companies capable to do it themselves? Do they have the people involved
that understand live performance, that understand merchandising, that
understand sponsorships and endorsements? Well, the fact of the matter is that over
the past ten-year period since these deals have become popular at major labels,
major labels are themselves starting to morph into general
entertainment companies. They go way beyond just
producing recordings. They're affiliating with
management companies. They're affiliating with merchandising,
sometimes partnering with those companies in order to create opportunities for
their artists to generate the income. I just recently dealt with
an A&R person at a major label. And his assistant got in touch with me,
and the assistant's title was manager of A&R and artist development. Motown always had an artist
development department. But over the past 30 years, record companies really kinda
got out of that business. But they're back in that
business right now. They're trying to develop their artists
to be able to expand their careers beyond just recording and
even performing live on stage. They want the artist to act. They want the artist to
be a pitch person so that that can generate more and
more income. Now the percentages they take on all
of these various sources can vary. It can vary from 10% to even up to 25%, but all of those percentages
have to be negotiated.