You might ask if you have sufficient
experience and musical training already to understand this course and
keep up with the other students. And I can tell you that in my
past experience teaching online, I've had a variety of students
ranging from let's say intermediate. A little further along than beginner. Let's say intermediate up to
complete professionals, and everybody seems to thrive pretty
well in this online environment. So I could ask you just a few things, and it would probably tell you
what you need to know. Can you currently,
read a piece of sheet music, a lead sheet of a standard song and
play it at the regular tempo and get through it all right, and
do you know some of the chord symbols. For instance, are you familiar with
C seven, or F minor seven and so on. And have you been trying, to improvise by listening to records and
just doodling around on your instrument to see if you can copy what you're
hearing on your favorite records. That's how most of us start out,
in improvising. There's one thing I have to
point out about this course and other music courses that would be similar. It's a little different than some
other types of courses you might take. For instance if you take a math course and
you learn a technique or a formula for math you can usually
apply it immediately to solve problems. But in the case of music the learning
experience is more subjective. It's like learning a new language. And it takes time for these things to
be assimilated into your memory and into how your brain functions, so you're
not going to go from being an intermediate level player to a fully professional
player over the course of the weeks that we're having this class,that will take
place in the months and even years that follow, as you keep working at it and
keep adding to your experience. So I just wanna caution you that
you may not see drastic change over the weeks that we're studying
the materials in the class. But you will be learning
the information and the knowledge that will carry you
on to being able to do it and to continue learning and assimilating
long after the course has finished.