Anytime a person places their
trust in another person to handle things on their behalf, you have what
is called a fiduciary relationship. A fiduciary is a person in whom
another person has placed their trust. It's a legal concept that applies
to personal manager's agreements. You might not see any specific
provision alluding to that in a personal management agreement,
but it is implied in most states. A fiduciary relationship means
the person in whom you placed your trust to look out for
your benefit has to do exactly that. They have to put your interest in this
case, in a personal management agreement, the artist's interest, the manager has to put the artist's
interests above their own. In other words, the deals that they
strike, the type of activities they pursue, have to benefit the artist
first before benefiting the manager. If a manager breeches that responsibility, the artist can sue them
to break the contract. I'll give you an example. There was an act in the beginning in
the first decade of the century that had a big record with a record company. And by big record I mean
it sold millions of copies. And their personal manager,
unbeknownst to them, entered into a consultant's
agreement shortly after that success with the very record company
that the artist was signed to. And the manager didn't tell the artist
that they had a consultant's agreement. In other words, the manager was being
paid thousands of dollars a month as a consultant with the record company
that the artist was signed to, which could clearly be considered putting his interest before that of the
artist, in that, should, at some point, the artist say, you know, you need to go
in and really renegotiate our contract, and try to get much more money for us, the
manager's position could be compromised because they're receiving a monthly
check from the record company. That resulted in a lawsuit
between the artist and the personal manager that
was eventually settled. But, that's an example of a claim for
a breach of fiduciary responsibility. In addition to the fiduciary relationship,
you also have another provision in a personal management agreement
that's very important. It's called the Power of Attorney. The Power of Attorney is a provision
that basically states that the manager has power of attorney from the artist to do things that the artist could do,
anything the artist could do. Sign checks. Enter into agreements. All of these things are gonna be
very important to the artist, and it's advisable for the artist to try
to limit the power of attorney so that the manager can only sign for
certain types of activities, say, a contract for only a few days as opposed
to a contract for a number of years. You can limit the amount for checks that
can be signed by the personal manager. Many entertainers say always
sign your own checks. Well, that can become very difficult when
an artist is on the road performing a lot. So, most manager's agreements have
power of attorney clauses, and it's important for artists to recognize that they can place
limitations on the power of attorney.