Copyright infringement is
a very serious issue and can have very serious ramifications. But, in certain circumstances,
the law allows limited uses of prior copyrighted works without getting
the permission of copyright owners. That's called fair use. And fair use is really a defense
to a copyright infringement claim. And that defense is usually used in
circumstances surrounding news reporting agencies, or when works are used in religious settings,
or educational settings, or even when copyrighted works are made
light of, and that's called a parody. So, if doing a news report on
TV you might hear snippets, small segments of a song, or
even videos, copyrighted videos. That might be considered fair use, and you may not have to get
the permission of the copyright owner. When copyrighted works are used
in an educational setting, particularly if it's a nonprofit
educational setting, or doing religious services, that can be considered fair use,
and you may not have to get the permission of the copyright owners to use
those works in those settings. To give you an example of Fair Use and its application in a copyright
infringement case, I'm gonna tell you about the test case in
this area, which goes back a few decades, and it really occurred in my
hometown of Cleveland, Ohio. There was a television station there that
announced, at the six o'clock news hour, be sure to stay tuned to the eleven
o'clock news, were gonna go out to the Cayahoga County Fairgrounds and
you're gonna see the human cannonball. Be sure to stay tuned. The 11 o'clock news cast came,
and the reporter, reporting from the Cuyahoga County
Fairgrounds says, yes, here we are. We're at the Cuyahoga County Fairgrounds
and here's the human cannonball. And they panned over to
the human cannonball climbing up the steps to the cannon,
packing himself into this cannon. The cameras showed the blast
as he took off, and they slowly followed him all the way
over 'til he landed in the net. Isn't that amazing, the human cannonball. We're here at
the Cayahoga County Fairgrounds, and back to you in the studio. Well, what they didn't know is that the
human cannonball had copyrighted his act. He had copyrighted a recording of him. And the human cannonball filed suit
against that television station and said, wait a minute,
you infringed on my copyright, you stole my act, my work,
my creative work. And the television station tried
to raise the Fair Use defense, and did say, wait a minute,
this was news reporting. We had the right to show that. And the court found that
it was not Fair Use, and they found the television station liable. And the Court's justification was, you didn't use a small portion
of this copyrighted work. You are a for profit television station, you had a vested interest in promoting
your eleven o'clock news where you play a lot of local commercials,
where you make a lot of money. And you used the entire hour act,
not a small portion. So I hope that's an example to show you
that courts look at a number of factors in determining whether or
not the Fair Use defense can be applied.