Record sales hit a peak
in 1999 of $14 billion. You'll probably remember
earlier I said that the sale of music in 1958 was only $604 million. So the century ended on a high note, and it was truly a century of technological
advancement and entrepreneurial momentum. But at the same time,
Napster arrived on the scene, and burst the bubble of CD sales. Those sales plummeted as a result of
illegal peer to peer file sharing. No one knew how to stop the havoc
that peer-to-peer file sharing was wreaking on the music
industry until 2003 and Steve Jobs of Apple computers came
up with a new way to access and purchase music online,
a digital distribution, a method iTunes,
that became very very successful. He also accompanied that with
hardware like the iPod and the Shuffle, which enabled people to
take music wherever they wanted to. Their music, their playlist,
similar to what happened back in the 80s with the Sony Walkman,
a great technological advancement. Interestingly enough, over the following
years, iTunes returned the single configuration as being the predominate
configuration in the music industry. I like to say that people had to
start living the singles life, and I referred back to the 60s and 70s when singles were the predominant
selling configuration of music. And that's what happened in
the first decade of this century. Also around that same time, you had
artists like David Bowie who predicted, and dreamed that one day music would
be accessible in an unlimited manner. He could see music flowing like water, and
he also, I think, dreamed of the music being paid for, just like you pay for
water, being paid on a monthly basis. There was another
technological advancement. Satellite radio. XM and Sirius Radio networks
enabled people to receive radio signals via satellite
in their automobiles. An interesting part about this is that. That was the first
technological advancement that had people willing to pay on
a monthly basis to receive music. Not a new concept. Certainly. Cable people have been paying,
since the 70's, a monthly bill. As a matter of fact,
I think about 75 to 100 million people pay a monthly cable bill,
and that was the thought. That this type of payment and
access to music, not just owning the physical product, but actually having unlimited access to
music would be a way of the future. Another emerging, technological
advancement was the internet radio service, Pandora, which really was built
on a model of a two-tierred type service where people could actually register for
the service and listen to it for free. But they also had a premium service, where
you can pay a monthly subscription fee, and that would eliminate the ads that were
placed between songs on the free service. Eventually, the recording
industry united and worked to put Napster out of business, but
you had the development of other services to provide music in a manner similar
to what David Bowie suggested. In a manner where the music
would flow like water. You wouldn't necessarily have
to have physical copies, but you would have access
rather than ownership. Internet and
mobile streaming services like Spotify and Rhapsody creates a new market of
tremendous growth for streaming services. In a multi tiered format, ad supported
free service, and premium subscription service which eliminates the ads,
has been creating great new revenue for the music industry that really
stands to continue in the future. Spotify was one of the first streaming
services that was able to negotiate licenses with all of the major labels and
many independent labels to allow for unlimited access to
a wide catalog of music. And artist have been considering
the ramifications of these special deals. And basically major record labels and
publishing companies and even recording artists have been given special deals and
the government as well, through compulsory licenses have been giving
these new companies, like Pandora and Spotify, special deals, royalty rate wise,
so they can get their business started. And in the hopes that this flourish and
they'll have a number of subscribers. And it will get to the scale that
everyone can make more money. And that's gonna be the big charge for
artists over the coming years, to make sure that they're represented
well and advocate for greater share of the revenue that's generated
from these subscription services and digital streaming as these
businesses come to scale. The advancement of digital technology
creates all types of opportunities for a number of businesses
through this medium. We've seen it over the first
decade of this century. Berkley alum Derek Sivers started CD Baby,
a digital service that allowed you to order CDs that were mailed to you and
now they can even be delivered digitally. You had Sonicbids, a company that
was started by another Berklee alum, Panos Panay,
which created a virtual talent agency and booking agency as well as providing
a number of other services. Social networking sites,
Facebook, Twitter. You have crowdfunding sites and
apps, Kickstarter, PledgeMusic, all creating great opportunities for
the merger of innovative technology with the creative sector of artists to reach
a brand-new market during this century. Many people point to the fact that
the live performance market has grown, as far as the generation of revenue. And many people feel that artists, even
though they may not make as much money from selling records or
even from having their music streamed or being heard through various subscription
services, how are they gonna make money? Well, many people think that
they can make money performing, that artists should be able
to make money on the road. They should be able to perform live. Well, that may be true. You have a tremendous growth in festivals. You have a growing club scene
throughout the country. The question will be to what
extent can artists, new artists, generate revenue from those sources? Certainly, the heritage artists and the artists that are performing at the big
festivals are making tremendous amount. But what about the artist that's
just starting at the club? And here's another point to think about. All creators of music
aren't performing artists. What about songwriters? Nashville has a great
system of songwriters, a great system of songwriting. And a great cadre of songwriters,
and all they do is write songs. Where do they stand in this mix? Considering the fact that sales are down,
and the streaming royalties, and the subscription royalties aren't
at the point that they can provide a great living that these song
writers had become accustomed to. So we're in the midst of changes there. Certainly they're gonna
grow over a period of time. Also artists are making tremendous
amounts, some of the top artists, from other types of opportunities
like endorsements and sponsorship and even product development. Fifty Cent hasn't released
a record in maybe eight years. But has he had a successful
career as a businessman? With Vitamin Water, he certainly did. He made millions,
hundreds of millions of dollars by owning, having an ownership
interest in that business. So, interesting things are happening
in the music industry. The possibilities are limitless, but you really have to find out
where do you stand in that. Are you gonna develop an app? Are you gonna write the next great song? Are you gonna be that performing artist? Are you gonna come up with
some other type of service that's gonna be a benefit artists? Where do you stand? What is your goal in this
new emerging digital age?