So, we've covered the bundle of rights
in the copyright in the composition that's protected by following
the performing arts, or PA type of registration
with the copyright office. But now let's talk about the bundle
of rights in the copyright to the sound recording protected by
filing the SR type of registration. These rights are very similar,
in many respects, to the rights of the composition. Some of these will sound familiar to you. The first right in
the bundle of rights for sound recording is the right
to reproduce and distribute. No one can reproduce or
distribute that sound recording without getting the permission of
the sound recording copyright owner. Whereas, in the case of
a copyright in the composition, the co-publishing and administration
agreement determines how the publisher and the songwriters get paid. In the case of the sound recording,
most recording artists are signed 100% interest in
the recordings to the record company. And the recording agreement
between the record company and the artist determines how the money
is split between the two parties. In the case of the reproduction and
distribution right of the sound recording copyright, the record company
usually pays the artist 13 to 16% for the sale of
the recordings that they distribute. But sometimes record companies
want other companies, and allow other companies,
to reproduce and distribute the works. You might have heard and
seen the television commercials for compilation recordings or
Time-Life series of recordings, which contain recordings from a number
of different record companies. Well in that instance, the record
company might license a specific track to another manufacturer for
a set fee or even for a royalty. Well in that case, that is considered
a third-party license and as we discussed under the recording agreement less than
a couple of weeks ago, you know that third-party income is split 50/50 between
the record company and the artist. Record labels will also license
the right of reproduction and distribution to digital music
services like Rhapsody, Spotify, and Rdio, for on demand streams. Many labels negotiate a certain percentage
of the ad revenue of these various services, which they split with their
artists under royalty terms determined by their contracts. Independent artists that own
their own sound recordings also license these rights
to digital music services, through aggregators like Nimbit,
TuneCore, or CD Baby. So, in the case of digital
distribution of downloads, for instance with iTunes, doesn't the record
company license those recordings? Could they be considered to license those
recordings to iTunes to reproduce and distribute? Most recording agreements say that
the sale through iTunes are, in fact, sales just as if the record company
reproduced and distributed the copies. And so, therefore,
the artist is only paid 13 to 16%, rather than the 50% if that digital
download had been considered a license. But there have been lawsuits and
decisions made in that regard. At least one that says that the sale
of digital downloads through iTunes are in fact a license, not a sale. The sound recording copyright bundle of
rights also includes the derivative right. No one can derive a new work
incorporating elements of that sound recording without getting a permission
of the sound recording copyright owner. Once again,
this works in the area of sampling. The hip hop genre was really
the start of sampling, where prior copyrighted sound
recordings were digitally lifted and placed into subsequent sound recordings. And in each case, even to this day,
it's important for the prior sound recording copyright to be
licensed to be put into the new recording. So, the derivative right is
becoming a very, very important right in the bundle of copyright rights
for the owners of sound recordings. Just ask the estate and the heirs of the late James Brown, one
of the most sampled artists of all time. The estate makes millions just from the
licensing of the derivative rights alone. The licensing of recording for derivative works is also
considered a third-party license. And in that case,
the income from that type of use is 50/50 between the record company and
the artist. The third right in,
the bundle of copyright interest owned by the sound recording copyright
owner, is the synchronization right, and just like the synchronization
of a song into a visual image, the incorporation of a sound
recording into a visual image, say a television commercial,
or a movie, or a TV show. The rights have to be obtained from
the owner of the sound recording. Usually, there's maybe
a flat fee payment for that. It could be a royalty. Whatever the amount of income that's
generated from the licensing of that use, is usually split 50/50 between
the record company and the artist. And the last right in the bundle of rights
of the sound recording is the digital performance right. The digital performance right, we just
talked about that a little earlier. That right was first enacted in 1995. Before that, record companies and
artists never received any royalties from the playing of their recordings. But now, since 1995,
any digital transmission of the sound recordings require a royalty payment
to the record company and the artist. As a result of that legislation, the
Recording Industry Association of America, the RIAA, which is a trade
organization made up of record labels, established a brand new performance
rights organization called SoundExchange. SoundExchange was formed specifically
to collect the digital performance royalties from digital transmitters. Each year, SoundExchange approaches
digital transmitters like SiriusXM radio, Pandora, cable television music channels, and they collect royalties to be split
between record labels and artists. Once SoundExchange determines how
much out of that massive amount of revenue is allocatable for each
particular song, they divide the money 50% to the record label,
45% to the featured artist, and 5% to the unions,
the American Federation of Musicians and the American Federation of Television and
Radio Artists. So that the session vocalist and
musicians can be paid. So, there you have it,
the four primary income-generating rights to the owner of the sound recording,
the record labels and the artists. And those rights are the reproduction and
distribution right, the derivative right, the synchronization right, and
the digital performance right. The reproduction or distribution right
is still very important to the owners of sound recordings, but there's another
right of that bundle of four, the digital performance right,
will continue to grow in influence and revenue as the digital
age continues to evolve.