Okay, we've covered the basics and now 
let's get started. Let's get to work. 
The first thing to understand is the similarity. 
And relationship between spoken word and improvisation. 
Our brain functions very much the same in both of those actions, so let's look how, 
at how speech works first. Let's say, what I want to do is talk 
about And explain to you what this thing is. 
And immediately, soon as I have the urge to communicate this information, my brain 
calls from my memory words that go with it. 
Mallet, vibraphone, yarn, rubber ball, rattan, flexible, and so on. 
And, you know, those words are all c-, you know, connected to this item in my 
memory, and they're all stored in my memory. 
We also have grammar, because it's not sufficient for me to explain this just by 
spouting random words. We also have to be able to arrange them 
in a logical sentence structure, to better understand. 
And that's what grammar does. We learn language normally as our pr-, 
primary language as a child, both by imitating and listening and tr-, testing 
trial and error, and we also study see it in school and learn even more detail 
about how grammar works and so on. Always adding to our vocabulary and our 
skill with grammar as we grow up and as we become more educated. 
There's also content when I explain something things. 
there's a certain order to it. The first statement introduces it. 
I'm going to tell you about this mallet. And then each sentence that I add adds to 
the story, tells what, how it was made you know, what the purpose of, of the 
different materials are, and so on. And so it makes it into a full 
explanation, a little story is told. So we have vocabulary, grammar, and 
content, and the same is true when improvising. 
For improvisers, the vocabulary is the notes, the sounds that we hear. 
we learn the, the names of the notes, and the sounds of the notes, and this also 
includes scales and chord outlines. So, these basic sounds of music are 
stored in our memory and we can call them up when we need them, depending on what 
the circumstances in the music at that moment, will call the right notes up, to 
play them. There is also a grammar to music. 
You know just as conversation is constantly moving forward in time as we 
talk, and add more to it and so on. The same thing happens with music, of 
course. We're in time, we're moving forward, and 
there is movement and motion as the harmonies change from one to the next. 
the way chords resolve, there are rules about which chords lead to which chords, 
and what kind of movement it is, and so on. 
Just like there are rules of grammar, there are rules for harmony and for 
music. And we learn how that works, and that 
also gets added to our memories. So that we can then make musical 
sentences that sound logical to people who are listening. 
And finally there's content. Just as in words when we're explaining 
something or telling a story or whatever, we do the same thing when improvising. 
our improvisations are fragments of melody that are connected together. 
And as you listen to them. Then you follow from one to the next and 
one to the next, and they follow a logical development. 
And and then you have a solo that can hold peoples attention. 
So we have the same three elements of language as in improvisation as we do in 
spoken language. So give that some thought and we're 
going to look at ways that it's put into practice.