<B>Heavy Weapons<B>

The heavy weapon class has existed almost as long as the ancient trooper class.  Emerging in the early days of combat as an anti-infantry weapon, the heavy weapon was later modified to destroy fortified castles and strongholds.  As the technology advanced, so did the heavy weapons, evolving from primitive stone catapults and pummels to artillery and energy-based weapons. But though the technologies have changed, the strategies have remained largely the same.

Artillery is probably the most fundamental support unit for an army marching into battle.  Certainly one of the first technological achievements of any civilization, the artillery serves the primary function of launching projectiles far across the battlefield into enemy infantry ranks, decimating an oncoming army.  As a secondary tactic, artillery also rains destruction down on buildings, sentry posts, and other fixed installations.  Because of its long-range capabilities, artillery armor is often minimal to none, and the cumbersome vehicles can be extremely vulnerable to the very troopers and mechs they bombard.  Especially devastating are the mounted troopers, who can quickly rush and overwhelm an artillery vehicle.  A defensive screen is essential for maximum efficiency.

The pummel was developed in a roughly parallel track with the fortified building.  As buildings became stronger and more well-defended, commanders identified the need for an armored vehicle capable of destroying walls and withstanding the guns and defensive weapons of any fortress.  The pummel, though slow-moving, is unmatched in its destructive capabilities, even stronger than the artillery barrage.  However, though the pummel is armored, mounted troopers can pinpoint their attacks and target the few exposed components, quickly crippling the unit.

Historically-speaking, a later addition to the heavy weapons class are the mobile anti-air vehicles.  While a force of anti-air troopers may be an annoyance to an enemy, the presence of mobile anti-air units will give any general pause.  They are well-armored and their offensive capabilities are extreme.  But like the others in their class, anti-air mobiles can be destroyed in short order by a strike force of mounted troopers.  However, a defensive escort can minimize this risk. 
