<B>Jedi<B>

The history of the battlefield Jedi is a long and complicated one.  The original Jedi Knights were largely pacifist, tending to concentrate on discoveries in the Force and studies in enlightenment.  They eschewed combat for the most part.  However, as their ranks grew, the Jedi were approached more and more often to aid in various planetary skirmishes.  They originally entered as peace-keepers and negotiators, but several conflicts escalated to the point where the Jedi could no longer remain neutral.  It was then that their awesome battlefield powers were truly unleashed.

The ancient Sith Wars marked the emergence of the Jedi warrior.  In those chaotic times, Force-users considered the art of war as important as meditation and the pursuit of self-knowledge.  They adhered to a strict code of honor and discipline, and their organization was quite martial in nature.

On the battlefield the Jedi could bring many powers to bear.  The obvious strength of any Jedi is his lightsaber, an incredibly powerful weapon capable of tearing apart virtually any alloy or armor in seconds.  Additionally, though Jedi are lightly armored, their uncanny instincts and foresight allow them to evade and minimize attacks, essentially giving them shields of a different nature.  As Jedi develop their power, they gain the ability to cloud the minds of their enemies, over considerable distances, and can turn enemy units against one another and recruit allies among the weak-minded.  And all Jedi can find and read Holocrons, which are repositories of knowledge useful to any army.

The Jedi's main battlefield opponents are the bounty hunters: soldiers for hire who specialize in tracking and killing Jedi Knights.  Unlike standard Troopers or other military units, bounty hunters focus their skills on the art of fighting and combat, and utilize many specialized weapons to take down their prey.  Any Jedi, no matter how strong in the Force, should beware the underhanded tactics of the bounty hunter.
