<B>Troopers<B>

Perhaps the most ancient military unit is the infantry soldier, the trooper.  Virtually every civilization can trace the history of their conflicts back to primitive hand-to-hand fighting between tribes.  As the need for military superiority increased, tribes began specializing.  Their people were trained to use spears, to attack in formation, to throw explosive projectiles, and finally to use firearms.  The bar was continually raised.  The trooper became a fast-moving ground unit, well-armored and equipped with a range of weapons.  As animals became domesticated, armies utilized the beasts' height and speed in the form of mounted troopers.  This cavalry began specializing in lightning-fast melee strikes, especially against the heavy weapons class.

However, as mechanized transports began appearing in the armies of the galaxy, troopers became more useful as cheap and plentiful fodder.  The "grunts" developed a reputation for being crazy and/or stupid, rushing into the heat of battle without much considering their incredibly vulnerable position.  As single fighters, they are no match against other classes.  Their strength will always lie in their overwhelming numbers.

That said, two civilizations have produced distinguished lines of troopers, for varying reasons.  The fighting prowess and sheer physical power of the Wookiees cannot be matched by any other trooper.  Their Wookiee Berserkers shred and destroy anything in their path, and die gladly for the honor of their clans.  Such devotion makes them a force to be reckoned with on the battlefield.  But even the lowliest of Wookiee troopers tends to be a fierce warrior.

Rebellion troops, while not possessing the strength or ferocity of the Wookiees, nevertheless fight valiantly, often against overwhelming odds.  The Rebel trooper has the strength of his beliefs and ideals; his battles are often ones of survival and freedom rather than conquest.  The desire for freedom strengthens the morale of the troopers so much it can even compensate for their scavenged equipment and weapons.  Imperial troops, though better supplied and organized, cannot hope to match the fighting spirit of the Rebellion.
